GOOD EVENING EVERYONE
AND WELCOME TO THE MARCH 11
WORK SESSION AT THE ANN ARBOR
CITY COUNCIL WHICH COULD NOT BE
MORE GLORIOUSLY POPULAR BY OLD
SCHOOL STAFF IN THE HOUSE.
>> SO DELIGHTED TO HAVE YOU ALL
HERE TODAY, MR. TONY.
>> YOU HAVE THE ECONOMIES US
GOOD.
GOOD EVENING AMERICA.
SO I GUESS THE FIRST AMAZING
THING I COULD TELL YOU IS AS
YOU CAN SEE WE SPENT ABOUT
FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS ON NEW
CLOCKS SO THAT YOU WON'T BE
COMPLAINING ANYMORE ABOUT TIME
AND IT WON'T BE SPITTING SO
IT'S ALL GOOD.
>> WE'RE DELIGHTED TO HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO BE HERE WITH YOU
THIS EVENING.
THIS IS YEAR TWO OF THE ANNUAL
BUDGET.
SO AS YOU KNOW WE ROLL THIS OUT
LAST YEAR AND SO BIODESIGN IT
WOULD BE HIGHLY IRREGULAR IF
THERE WERE MAJOR, MAJOR CHANGES
TO YEAR TWO.
SO I'LL JUST TELL YOU NOW
THERE'S NOT A WE HAVE MODIFIED
THE WAY THAT WE PUT THE BUDGET
TOGETHER AND THE CHANGES THAT
WE MADE IN PROCESS WE ARE GOING
TO INSTITUTIONALIZE PRIOR TO
THIS YEAR THE PROCESS WAS
REALLY A PAPER FLOW EXERCISE.
PEOPLE FILLED OUT A WHOLE BUNCH
OF PIECES OF PAPER AND WENT
THROUGH A LOT OF PROCESS AND
ULTIMATELY COMING IN TO THE
ADMINISTRATORS OFFICE FOR SOME
KIND OF DECISION ON THE
PROPOSED BUDGET THIS YEAR WE
ALL WENT TO COBBLESTONED IN
PERSON.
I FELT IT WAS IMPORTANT FOR
SERVICE AREAS TO HEAR WHAT
THEIR COLLEAGUES NEEDS WERE A
IMPORTANT FOR ALL OF US TO HAVE
MORE OF A GLOBAL UNDERSTANDING
OF WHAT OUR CHALLENGES ARE THAT
PROCESS DID INFLUENCE THE FLOW
OF THE BUDGET BECAUSE SOME
PEOPLE UPON HEARING THE GLOBAL
NEEDS OF THE GOVERNMENT BACKED
OFF ON SOME THINGS THAT THEY
WERE REQUESTING BECAUSE THEY
SAW KIND OF WHERE WE WERE WHAT
OUR PRIORITIES ARE THE PRESENT
STATIONS THAT YOU'LL HEAR
TONIGHT WILL INCLUDE EIGHT
PEOPLE.
>> MISSY IS AWAY THIS WEEK SO
YOU WON'T HEAR FROM OSSI.
THE STAFF MAY BE A BIT ANXIOUS
WHEN YOU HEAR FROM THEM BECAUSE
THEY DO NOT YET KNOW WHAT'S
ACTUALLY IN THE BUDGET.
THEY ONLY KNOW WHAT THEY ASK
FOR.
I CAN TELL YOU POINT BLANK THAT
NOT EVERYTHING YOU HEAR TONIGHT
WILL BE IN THE BUDGET THAT IS
MATHEMATICALLY IMPOSSIBLE.
WE HAVE SO MANY NEEDS.
>> WE HAVE THIS MUCH MONEY.
>> OUR JOB IS TO MAKE SURE THAT
IT IS BALANCED.
>> AND MARTY, IN OUR MEETING
TODAY STILL IN THE THROES
OF TRYING TO PUT THE BUDGET ALL
THE WAY TOGETHER BECAUSE IT'S
GOT TO BE ALL THE WAY BALANCED,
YOU WILL GET A PRESENTATION ON
APRIL 15TH FROM ME THAT WILL BE
THE ACTUAL PROPOSED BUDGET
.
WE JUST GET OUR MARIJUANA
EXCISE TAX NO WITHIN THE PAST
COUPLE OF WEEKS IN ROUND
NUMBERS ABOUT ONE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND MORE THAN
IT WAS A YEAR PRIOR WHICH SAYS
ANY NOTION THAT WE HAVE THAT
THAT'S GOING TO BE A REVENUE
STREAM THAT TAKES OFF.
WE JUST NEED TO RETHINK THAT
BECAUSE WE'VE EXTENDED HOURS.
IT'S JUST NOT MAKING THAT MUCH
OF A DIFFERENCE MATERIALLY IN
TERMS OF THE BIG PICTURE WE ASK
THAT YOU HOLD YOUR QUESTIONS
UNTIL EVERYBODY HAS PRESENTED
AND THEN WE WILL DO OUR Q&A
PROCESS TONIGHT.
BUT WE'LL ALSO WHEN WE GET TO
THE ACTUAL BUDGET IN A MONTH
WE'LL USE THE SAME PROCESS AS
WE USED BEFORE.
WE LIKE YOU TO SUBMIT YOUR
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE BUDGET IN
WRITING.
>> WE LIKE FOR THEM TO COME TO
SARAH MARTY CAMUSSO, MY
DAUGHTER AND MYSELF, WE WILL
FORMULATE ALL OF THOSE SARAH
WILL SEND OUT A REPORT EVERY
FRIDAY.
THESE ARE THE QUESTIONS WE GOT
THIS WEEK.
HERE'S WHAT THE ANSWERS ARE SO
EVERYONE WILL SEE EVERY
QUESTION GETS ASKED AND YOU'LL
SEE EVERY ANSWER THAT WE GAVE.
THERE WAS A LITTLE BIT
OF CONFUSION LAST YEAR.
WE'LL TRY TO KEEP THAT TO A
MINIMUM THIS YEAR IN THAT
STARTING TO POSE QUESTIONS
AFTER TONIGHT YOU CAN DO THAT
BUT YOU HAVEN'T HEARD THE
BUDGET.
YOU'RE ONLY HEARING WHAT PEOPLE
HAVE REQUESTED.
CONSIDER FOR AND YOU'RE ALSO
HEARING WHAT'S ON OUR HORIZON
IN THE NEXT TWO TO THREE YEARS.
WE'VE BUILT LIKE IT IS
IMPORTANT FOR YOU TO HAVE A
VIEW OF THAT SO THAT OUR NEEDS
ARE CLEAR AND YOU'LL UNDERSTAND
THE EFFORTS THAT WE'RE TAKING
TO GENERATE MORE REVENUE TO
COVER SOME OF THE NEEDS THAT WE
HAVE.
SO WITH THAT, MARTY CAN COME UP
.
SHE WILL BE OUR FIRST PRESENTER
AND EVERYONE ELSE WILL JUST
FLOW AFTER HER.
GOOD EVENING.
I HAVE THE PLEASURE THIS
EVENING OF KICKING OFF OUR
DISCUSSION BY COVERING OUR
FISCAL YEAR.
TWENTY FIVE BUDGET PLAN AND
FISCAL OUTLOOK.
I'LL BEGIN BY QUICKLY COVERING
SOME SOME PROCESS REMINDERS AS
WELL AS OUR BUDGET CALENDAR.
YOU'LL SEE THAT WE START OUT
THIS EVENING BY HEARING FROM
VARIOUS UNITS THE UPDATES TO
OUR ORIGINALLY PRESENTED PLAN
AS WELL AS HORIZON ISSUES.
THEN WE MOVE ON TO APRIL 15TH
WHERE MR. DE HONY WILL PRESENT
HIS RECOMMENDED BUDGET TO
COUNCIL.
IN ADDITION, COUNCIL WILL HEAR
FIRST READING OF AUDIENCE
CHANGES THAT ARE REQUIRED FOR
OUR UTILITY RATE UPDATES THAT
ON MAY SIX WE'LL HOLD PUBLIC
HEARINGS REQUIRED FOR THE
BUDGET ORDINANCE AND FEE
CHANGES AND ON THAT SAME
EVENING WE'LL CONDUCTED THE
SECOND READINGS ON ORDINANCE
AND RATE CHANGES THAT ALL
CULMINATES ON THE EVENING
OF MAY 20TH WHEN CITY COUNCIL
WILL CONSIDER AND ADOPT THE
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY FIVE BUDGET
AS WELL AS THE RELATED FEE
CHANGES THAT COINCIDE WITH THAT
BUDGET SIMULTANEOUSLY EACH YEAR
IN OPERATING BUDGET AND CAPITAL
BUDGET ARE ADOPTED.
THE BUDGET THAT IS BROUGHT
FORWARD TO COUNCIL FOR
CONSIDERATION INCORPORATES
COUNCIL POLICIES, STAFF
EXPERTIZE AS WELL AS PUBLIC
INPUT THE MAJOR POLICIES WE
ADHERE TO RECOMMENDING A BUDGET
TO COUNCIL INCLUDE THOSE LISTED
HERE ON THE SLIDE AS WELL AS
SOME OTHERS AND THE EVENING
OF MAY 20TH IT TAKES SEVEN
VOTES OF COUNCIL TO ADOPT THE
BUDGET AND ONLY SIX VOTES
REQUIRED TO AMEND THE
RECOMMENDED BUDGET THAT EVENING
.
WHEREAS AN ADOPTED BUDGET
DURING THE FISCAL YEAR WILL
REQUIRE EIGHT VOTES OF COUNCIL
TO AMEND IF THE IF THE
PRESENTED BUDGET IS NOT
APPROVED BY COUNCIL ON MAY 20TH
,MR. DONEES RECOMMENDED BUDGET
GOES INTO EFFECT.
THE CITY DOES NOT ADOPT A LINE
ITEM BUDGET WE ADOPT A BUDGET
BY FUNDING IN TOTAL WITH THE
EXCEPTION OF THE GENERAL FUND
WHERE WE ADOPT A BUDGET BY
SERVICE AREA OR WHAT WE
INTERNALLY REFER TO AS AGENCY.
IT IS TYPICAL EACH YEAR AT THE
LAST MEETING OF THE FISCAL YEAR
THE SECOND MEETING IN JUNE CITY
COUNCIL CONSIDERS A BUDGET
AMENDMENT TO ADDRESS
UNANTICIPATED EXPENSES THAT
HAPPENED DURING THE YEAR TO
ENSURE OUR COMPLIANCE WITH
STATE LAW.
>> NEXT I'LL PROVIDE YOU SOME
FINANCIAL BACKGROUND THAT MAY
BE HELPFUL AS WE DEVELOP
STRATEGIES GOING FORWARD LISTED
IN THE LEFT HAND COLUMN OF THIS
SLIDE YOU'LL SEE THE CITY
VILLAGES THAT ARE BEING LEVIED
OVERALL WE HAVE AUTHORIZATION
TO LEVY UP TO TWENTY THREE
MILLS AND WE CURRENTLY ARE
LEVYING JUST UNDER TWENTY ONE
AND A HALF MILLS LEAVING A LEVY
CAPACITY OF JUST OVER ONE AND A
HALF MILLS AS A POINT
OF REFERENCE A MILL IN FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY FOUR GENERATED
SEVEN POINT ONE MILLION
DOLLARS.
THE RIGHT HAND COLUMN ON THE
SLIDE WILL REFLECT WHAT THE
CITY IS CURRENTLY LEVYING DUE
IN THE HADLEE ROLLBACK WHICH
REQUIRES LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO
REDUCE ITS MILLAGE LEVY WHEN
ANNUAL GROWTH ON EXISTING
PROPERTY EXCEEDS THE RATE
OF INFLATION.
OUR TOTAL TAX LEVY FOR THE
CURRENT FISCAL YEAR WAS
SEVENTEEN POINT SEVEN MILLS.
>> CURRENTLY THE CITY HOLDS
OVER TWENTY TWO HUNDRED AND
SEVENTY THREE MILLION DOLLARS
IN DEBT THE LARGEST DEBT
CATEGORY OF ONE HUNDRED AND
SIXTEEN MILLION IS A REVOLVING
LOAN CATEGORY REVOLVING LOANS
FOR A STATE RUN PROGRAM THAT WE
ARE ABLE TO TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF THAT OFFERS ADVANTAGEOUS
FINANCING OPTIONS FOR THE CITY
FOR MOST OF THE PAST DECADE FOR
OUR UTILITY ENTERPRISES WE'VE
UTILIZED A STATE RUN PROGRAM
INSTEAD OF GOING TO MARKET ON
OUR OWN.
IT'S A CHEAPER OPTION FOR THE
CITY GOING TO MARKET FOR BONDS
CAN BE QUITE EXPENSIVE ENDEAVOR
NEXT.
>> WE HAVE NINETY SEVEN MILLION
IN GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS
THAT INCLUDES DEBT THAT WE
INCUR FOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
SOME EXAMPLES WOULD INCLUDE THE
COURTS PDE FACILITY, THE
WHEELER MAINTENANCE FACILITY
AND MOST RECENTLY THE ROAD
BONDS THAT WE SHOWED THE GRAPH
ON THE RIGHT HAND SIDE OF THE
SLIDE REPRESENTS WHEN THAT
EXISTING DEBT WILL ROLL OFF AND
YOU'LL NOTICE WITHIN 15 YEARS
THE MAJORITY OF OUR DEBT WILL
COME OFF THE BOOKS
NEXT STEP
WILL GO OVER THE ASSUMPTIONS
THAT WE ASSUMED IN THE IN THE
BUDGET PLAN AND THE REASONING
BEHIND THOSE ASSUMPTIONS OVER
50 PERCENT OF THE GENERAL FUND
REVENUE IS GENERATED FROM REAL
AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES WE
ARE FORECASTING TO GENERATE 76
MILLION DOLLARS.
THAT INCLUDES A SIX PERCENT
INCREASE FOR FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
FIVE THEREAFTER FOR FISCAL
YEARS TWENTY SIX THROUGH TWENTY
NINE WE'RE FORECASTING A THREE
PERCENT INCREASE EACH YEAR AS
YOU RECALL MAY RECALL FROM THE
PREVIOUS SLIDE THAT WE
DISCUSSED THE MILLAGE CAPACITY
LEGISLATION IS IN PLACE THAT
LIMITS A LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON
GROWTH.
WE ARE LIMITED TO A FIVE
PERCENT CAP ON EXISTING
PROPERTY PLUS NEW DEVELOPMENT
WHEN WE INCORPORATE THE
ANTICIPATED ADDITIONS AND
LOSSES IT'S FORECASTED BY OUR
ZESTING DEPARTMENT.
WE ARE PROJECTING THAT SIX
PERCENT INCREASE RESULTING IN
AN ADDITIONAL THIRTY TWO OR
THREE POINT TWO MILLION.
WE'LL TALK MORE ABOUT OUR
REVENUE TAX VALUE IN REVENUE ON
THE NEXT SLIDE UP.
SO WE'LL JUST MOVE ON TO OUR
NEXT LARGEST REVENUE CATEGORY
WHICH IS STATE SHARED REVENUE
THAT REVENUE IS ESTIMATED TO
ACCOUNT FOR THIRTEEN MILLION
DOLLARS IN FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
FOUR I'M SORRY TWENTY FIVE AND
THAT COMES IN IN TWO
DISTINCTIVE CATEGORIES EITHER
CONSTITUTIONAL OR STATUTORY.
THE CONSTITUTIONAL PORTION IS
THE LARGER OF THE TWO AND THAT
IS ALLOWED BY MICHIGAN'S
CONSTITUTION.
AND IS THIS OUR SHARE
OF MICHIGAN'S SIX PERCENT SALES
TAX THAT ACCOUNTS FOR ELEVEN
MILLION OF THE THIRTEEN MILLION
DOLLARS WE ARE PROJECTING WE
ARE BENEFITING FROM SOME
INCREASED STATE ALLOCATIONS IN
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY FIVE.
THEREFORE OUR INCREASING OUR
PROJECTIONS TO TWENTY FIVE
PERCENT FOR THAT FISCAL YEAR.
WE'RE THEN PROJECTING TO
MAINTAIN RELATIVELY FLAT FOR
TWENTY SIX OR TWENTY NINE AND
THE STATUTORY SIDE THAT PROGRAM
IS ALSO PREVIOUSLY KNOWN AS
CATORCE OR CITY VILLAGE TAX
REVENUE SHARING.
IT'S A SUPPLEMENTAL PROGRAM
THAT IS AVAILABLE TO LOCAL
AGENCIES WHO MEET ELIGIBILITY
REQUIREMENTS.
THE CITY MEETS THOSE
REQUIREMENTS AND WE STRIVE TO
DO SO AND THAT GENERATES AN
ADDITIONAL APPROXIMATELY TWO
MILLION DOLLARS.
WE ARE THEN PROJECTING TO
INCREASE THAT THREE PERCENT
EACH YEAR ANNUALLY AFTER THAT
ARE THE OVERALL ECONOMY AND THE
CITY STATE SHARED REVENUE IS
DEPENDENT ON CONSUMER SPENDING
ALTHOUGH SPENDING HAS REMAINED
STRONG THROUGH THE INFLATIONARY
PERIOD WE ARE SEEING SIGNS THAT
SPENDING IS SLOWING CONSUMER
HAS SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASED AND
AFFORDABILITY IS BECOMING AN
ISSUE.
INTEREST RATES REMAIN HIGH AND
STIMULUS IN COVID SAVINGS HAVE
BEEN EXHAUSTED.
THEREFORE WE ARE REMAINING
CAUTIOUSLY OPTIMISTIC IN
REVENUE FORECASTING.
FINALLY ON THE REVENUE SIDE WE
ARE CONTINUING TO FORECAST A
REBOUND OF PARKING REVENUE AND
WE'RE ESTIMATING A 16 PERCENT
INCREASE FOR FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
FIVE FOR THE REMAINDER OF THE
FIVE YEAR PLAN WE'RE ESTIMATING
A THREE PERCENT INCREASE FOR
EACH YEAR AS PROMISED, THE
SLIDE REPRESENTS OUR TAXABLE
VALUE IN REVENUE HISTORY.
OUR GENERAL OPERATING TAX
REVENUE IS REPRESENTED BY THE
BLUE BARS ON THE SLIDE AND IF
YOU REFER TO THE LEFT ACCESS
HERE YOU'LL SEE THAT OUR
REVENUE STREAM HAS SEEN MODEST
GROWTH YEAR OVER YEAR OF ABOUT
TWO TO SIX PERCENT.
HOWEVER, WHEN YOU COMPARE
TWENTY SIXTEEN AT FIFTY TWO
POINT FIVE MILLION TO FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY FIVE SEVEN OUR
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY FOUR SORRY
SEVENTY THREE MILLION DOLLARS
THAT REPRESENTS A SIGNIFICANT
INCREASE TO THE REVENUE STREAM
THE ORANGE LINE ON THE CHART
REPRESENTS THE NET PERCENTAGE
INCREASE IN TAXABLE VALUE WHICH
INCLUDES GROWTH AND LOSSES.
SO IF YOU REFER TO THE ACCESS
THE VERTICAL AXIS ON THE RIGHT
HAND OF THE SLIDE YOU'LL SEE
THE PERCENTAGE INCREASE.
SO IN FISCAL YEAR TWENTY TWO
WHAT WE'RE NOT SEEING IS A
DECREASE OF TAXABLE VALUE BUT A
DECREASE IN THE CHANGE FROM THE
PREVIOUS YEAR.
SO IN FISCAL YEAR TWENTY AND
TWENTY ONE WE SAW INCREASES
OF SIX PERCENT AND FIVE PERCENT
RESPECTIVELY AND THOSE WERE AS
A RESULT OF DEVELOPMENTS COMING
ONLINE.
BUT THEN IN TWENTY TWO WE SAW A
DECREASE IN THE IN THE GROWTH
RATE AND WE WERE DOWN TO A
THREE PERCENT GROWTH.
SO WE ARE FORECASTING THE
GROWTH RATE TO CONTINUE TO GROW
MOSTLY DUE TO INFLATION BUT IT
DOES INDEED INCLUDE SOME NEW
DEVELOPMENT SO IN ADDITION TO
NEW DEVELOPMENT WE ALSO
EXPERIENCES THINGS THAT COME
OFF THE TAX ROLL.
SO IF A PROPERTY COMES OFF THE
TAX ROLL BECAUSE IT'S PURCHASED
BY A NON TAXABLE ENTITY OR IN
THE EVENT THERE ARE LEGISLATIVE
CHANGES THAT OCCURRED LIKE THAT
OCCURRED IN TWENTY TWENTY THREE
IN WHICH THE PERSONAL PROPERTY
EXEMPTION CAP WAS INCREASED SO
WE CAN NO LONGER COLLECT AS
MUCH TAX ON PERSONAL PROPERTY
AS WE HAVE PREVIOUSLY.
NOW MOVING ON TO THE
EXPENDITURE SIDE OF THE PLAN WE
ARE EXPERIENCING LABOR AND
BENEFIT INCREASES THAT NOT ONLY
IMPACT OUR INTERNAL COSTS BUT
ALSO OUR OTHER CHARGES AND
CONTRACTED SERVICES WE'RE
PROJECTING TWO POINT SIX
PERCENT INCREASE IN FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY FIVE FOUR PERSONNEL AT
THREE PERCENT EACH YEAR EACH
YEAR THEREAFTER AND FRINGES
EIGHT POINT SEVEN FOR FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY FIVE AND THEN A
TOTAL OF SIX POINT EIGHT
BETWEEN 2006 AND TWENTY NINE AS
WE MOVE ON TO OTHER SERVICES IN
CONTRACTED WORK WE'RE
PROJECTING EIGHT POINT SIX NINE
INCREASE FOR FISCAL OR TWENTY
FIVE AND THREE POINT SEVEN FOR
THE NEXT THREE YEAR PERIOD.
WE STILL ARE EXPENSING
EXPERIENCING SUPPLY CHAIN
ISSUES AND CONTRACTOR CAPACITY
ISSUES THAT ARE DRIVING SOME
PRICES IN THOSE AREAS.
AS WE TAKE A LOOK AT THE
OVERALL FINANCIAL PICTURE, THE
TOP PORTION OF THE SLIDE
REPRESENTS OUR OUR FORECASTED
RECURRING REVENUE AND
EXPENDITURES AND YOU'LL SEE IN
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY FIVE OR IN A
GOOD SITUATION WHERE RECURRING
REVENUE IS EXCEEDING RECURRING
EXPENDITURES.
HOWEVER, USING THE ASSUMPTIONS
THAT WE DISCUSSED IN THE
PREVIOUS SLIDE BY FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY SEVEN WE ARE THEN IN A
SITUATION WHERE OUR RECURRING
OPERATIONAL EXPENSES ARE EXCEED
OUR OPERATIONAL REVENUES.
>> THIS IS A SITUATION WE WILL
BE LOOKING TO SOLVE FOR IN
SUBSEQUENT CYCLE AND CAUTIONS
US FROM ADDING ANY RECURRING
EXPENDITURES WITHOUT
APPROPRIATE REVENUE OFFSETS OR
REDUCTION IN EXPENDITURES ON
THE BOTTOM OF SECTION OF THE
SLIDE YOU SEE THE ONE TIME
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURES WHICH
ARE POSSIBLE BECAUSE IN FISCAL
YEAR 2005 WE HAVE EXCEEDING
RECURRING REVENUES.
HOWEVER WE STILL THEN HAVE TO
STAY IN COMPLIANCE WITH OUR
FUND BALANCE POLICY WHICH IS 15
TO 20 PERCENT OF RECURRENT
EXPENDITURES IN THE GENERAL
FUND AS A CREDIT TO THE
FINANCIAL TEAM PAST AND PRESENT
,THE CITY IS IN GOOD FINANCIAL
SHAPE AND IT'S REFLECTED IN
THESE KEY PERFORMANCE MEASURES
EACH YEAR OUR FINANCIAL
STATEMENTS AS WELL AS OUR
FINANCIAL PRACTICES ARE AUDITED
WITH A GOAL OF NO MATERIAL
WEAKNESSES WHICH WE HAVE A
RECORD OF ACHIEVING THERE IS
ONLY ONE LEVEL ABOVE DOUBLE AA
PLUS FOR BOND RATINGS THAT WE
HAVE CURRENTLY IN WASTEWATER
AND GENERAL OBLIGATION.
THEREFORE WE ARE ABLE TO ISSUE
DEBT AT THE MOST FAVORABLE
FINANCIAL SITUATION AS WE
DISCUSSED IN THE PREVIOUS
SLIDE, MATCHING RECURRING
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURES ARE A
SIGN OF FINANCIAL HEALTH AND
OVERSIGHT THEREFORE IS AN
IMPORTANT COMPONENT OF OUR
ANNUAL BUDGET PROCESS IN
ADDITION TO
MAINTAINING OUR
FUND BALANCE TO COMPLY WITH
ESTABLISHED POLICY, IT IS A KEY
SIGN OF FINANCIAL DISCIPLINE IN
HEALTH AND YOU'LL SEE HERE THAT
EACH YEAR WE ARE REPORTING
ABOVE OUR REQUIRED MINIMUM FUND
BALANCE.
HOWEVER, THAT TYPICALLY WE
TYPICALLY ARE ACTUALLY RUNNING
RIGHT AROUND TWENTY PERCENT.
>> IT'S REALLY A REFLECTION
OF TIMING THE EXPENDITURES
FISCAL YEARS AND FINALLY OUR
PENSION AND RETIREE HEALTH CARE
RATE FUNDING RATIOS ARE
CONSIDERED EXCELLENT AND VERY
HEALTHY AND THEY ARE
ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE CITY'S
FUNDING POLICIES AND THOSE
PLANS AND THE DILIGENT
OVERSIGHT OF THE PENSION BOARD
.
>> MY PRESENTATION THIS EVENING
HAS FOCUSED MAINLY ON THE
GENERAL FUND.
HOWEVER, I'LL END WITH A COUPLE
OF COMMENTS ON A FEW OF OUR
ENTERPRISE FUNDS AS PART OF OUR
ANNUAL BUDGET PROCESS WE GO
THROUGH SIMILAR FINANCIAL
PROCESSES FOR EACH FUND IN THE
CASE OF THE UTILITY FUNDS, THE
PROCESS GENERATES A RATE PLAN
WHICH TYPICALLY REQUIRES THE
ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT THIS CYCLE WE
PLAN TO REMAIN WITHIN THE PLAN
WE SHARED WITH YOU LAST YEAR
WHICH WILL RESULT IN USER RATE
INCREASES THAT YOU WILL
CONSIDER FOR SIX PERCENT FOR
WATER, THREE PERCENT FOR
SANITARY SEWER AND THREE
PERCENT FOR STORM WATER.
OUR NEXT PRESENTER BRIAN
STEIGLITZ, PUBLIC SERVICES AREA
ADMINISTRATOR.
WE'LL DISCUSS FURTHER PLAN IN
THESE AREAS.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
THANK YOU.
MISS PRASAD SAID I WILL GO
THROUGH WITH THE PUBLIC
SERVICES AREA BUDGET IMPACTS
AND HORIZON ISSUES.
I WILL START WITH THE BUDGET
IMPACTS.
BEFORE I START I WOULD LIKE TO
RECOGNIZE THE PUBLIC SERVICES
AREA TEAM WHO IS HERE TONIGHT
TO SUPPORT ME TO ANSWER ALL
OF YOUR DIFFICULT QUESTIONS
WHICH WILL BE HEARING ABOUT
LATER ON IN THE EVENING.
I HEARD FROM ONE OF OUR UNIT
MANAGERS WHO SAID THAT THEY
HAVE BEEN IN COUNCIL CHAMBERS
IN SEVERAL YEARS.
SO I'M VERY HAPPY TO HAVE
PROVIDED THAT OPPORTUNITY TO
THEM TONIGHT.
SO I'LL START WITH THE GENERAL
FUND.
WE HAVE TWO BUDGET IMPACTS
OF NOTE FOR FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
FIVE.
THE FIRST IS TO DO CONDITION
ASSESSMENT AT BARTON DAM.
YOU PROBABLY SEEN WE'VE BEEN
TALKING A LOT ABOUT BARTON DAM
AND THERE IS A PROJECT THAT
WILL BE COMING BEFORE YOU
SHORTLY TO DO SOME REPAIRS.
IT'S CURRENTLY OUT TO BID ON
SOME OF THE EMBANKMENT BUT WE
HAVEN'T REALLY ADDRESSED YET
THE STRUCTURAL CONCRETE ISSUES
.
THE DAM THE DAM WAS BUILT IN
THE EARLY NINETEEN HUNDREDS AND
IF YOU CAN SEE IN THIS PICTURE
THAT'S A PICTURE OF THE
SIDEWALL OF THE HYDRO FACILITY
AND THIS IS CURSER WORK OK YES.
YOU CAN SEE OVER HERE THERE ARE
THESE BARS THAT ARE EXPOSED TO
THOSE ARE STRUCTURAL REBAR
WHICH IS PART OF THE INTEGRITY
OF THE WALL.
SO AS PART OF OUR LAST FIVE
YEAR SAFETY INSPECTION THAT'S
DONE BY THE REGULATOR, THEY'VE
IDENTIFIED THESE THINGS AS THE
THINGS THAT WE NEED TO
INVESTIGATE.
HENCE THE REQUEST TO DO THE
ASSESSMENT IN THIS COMING
FISCAL YEAR THE COST OF THE
ASSESSMENT IS ABOUT ONE HUNDRED
AND TWENTY THOUSAND DOLLARS.
THIS IS HALF OF IT ON THE
FUNDING OF THE WORK THAT
HAPPENS AT BARTON DAM IS SPLIT
BETWEEN THE WATER FUND AND THE
GENERAL FUND BECAUSE THE DAM
PROVIDES POWER WHICH IS PART
OF THE GENERAL FUND WHICH TAKES
THE REVENUE FROM THE POWER
GENERATION AND THEN THE WATER
FUND BECAUSE THE IMPOUNDMENT
PROVIDES THE IMPOUNDMENT FOR
THE CITY'S WATER SUPPLY.
SO YOU'LL SEE THAT ON MY WATER
FUND SLIDE WHERE YOU'LL SEE THE
ADDITIONAL 60000.
THE OTHER ITEMS IDENTIFIED HERE
IS SUPPORT FOR ART FAIR.
WE DO A LOT OF THINGS TO HELP
MAKE SURE ART FAIR ARE
SUCCESSFUL.
THE CITY DOES AND THE
ASSOCIATIONS THAT HAVE ASKED
FOR SOME SUPPORT BASED ON SOME
OF THE EXPENSES THAT'S INCURRED
THAT ARE TYPICALLY REIMBURSED
BY THE ART FAIR.
SO WE'RE ASKING CONSIDERATION
FROM COUNCIL TO SUPPORT ART
FAIR ON THE AMOUNT OF TWENTY
FIVE THOUSAND.
WELL THAT'S ONE TIME ASK.
WE WOULD ANTICIPATE THAT IT
WOULD LIKELY BECOME A RECURRING
REQUEST FROM THE ASSOCIATIONS
BUT IT'S PART OF THIS BUDGET
REQUEST.
IT'S JUST FOR FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY FIVE.
>> MOVING ON TO THE ENGINEERING
FUND PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT.
THIS IS THE ONE AREA IN PUBLIC
SERVICES WHERE WE'RE SEEKING AN
ADDITIONAL FTE ON FTE IS TO
SUPPORT OUR PLAN REVIEW PROCESS
.
WE HAVE CURRENTLY HAVE PRETTY
SUBSTANTIAL BACKLOG OF PRIVATE
DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEWS AND WE
ALSO ANTICIPATE A LOT MORE
COMING DOWN THE ROAD.
WE'RE CURRENTLY SUPPORTING ONE
FTE FULL TIME CONTRACT SUPPORT
PERSON FROM THE CONSULTING FIRM
TO HELP US MAINTAIN THE
BACKLOG.
SO THIS WOULD BE ABLE TO
PROVIDE SOME OFFSET TO ACTUALLY
THE CONSULTING SERVICES THAT
WE'RE USING BUT PROVIDE THOSE
SERVICES CURRENTLY IN THE WATER
FUND WE HAVE THREE ITEMS ONE
THE FIRST ONE IS THE OTHER HALF
OF THE CONDITION ASSESSMENT
OF THE CONCRETE WORK BARTON
DAM.
THE NEXT ITEM IS TWO HUNDRED
AND SEVENTY FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS FOR WATER SYSTEM REPAIR
PARTS.
SO THESE ARE THINGS LIKE
HYDRANTS, VALVES SERVICE
CONNECTIONS AND APPURTENANCES
WE USE FOR DOING WORK ON THE
WATER SYSTEM WE HAVE IN OUR
BASIC BUDGET THAT HAS BEEN
APPROVED AS PART OF THE TWO
YEAR BUDGET CYCLE.
WE ALREADY HAVE FIVE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS ALLOTTED FOR
THIS ITEM.
SO THIS IS IN ADDITION TO WHAT
IS IDENTIFIED IN OUR CURRENT
CURRENT BUDGET AND THE
RATIONALE FOR IT IS PRIMARILY
ONE INFLATION.
WE'VE SEEN SIGNIFICANT COST
INCREASES IN SOME OF THESE
COMPONENTS AND ALSO WHEN WE'RE
DOING A LOT OF THE ENGINEERING
WORK REPLACING WATER MAINS AS
PART OF ENGINEERING PROJECTS
THAT WE HAVE THROUGHOUT THE
CITY, WE LIKE TO GET AHEAD
OF THOSE AND REPLACE SOME
OF THIS INFRASTRUCTURE TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE'RE SET UP FOR
SUCCESS.
SO THAT MIGHT BE REPLACING
VALVES THAT WE'RE NOT SURE ARE
GOING TO WORK BEFOREHAND TO
MAKE SURE WE CAN GET GOOD
SHUTDOWNS, THAT TYPE OF WORK.
AND THIS IS WHAT THIS THESE
THIS REQUEST WILL FUND.
AND THEN THE THIRD ITEM IS
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM MODEL
AND PLAN.
THIS PLAN HAS ALREADY COME
BEFORE COUNCIL AND WAS APPROVED
BUT IT WILL BE COMING OUT
OF THE AN ADDITIONAL ASK FOR
THE WATER FUNDING FOR FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY FIVE.
I DID WANT TO MENTION THAT ALL
OF THESE ADDITIONAL FUND
RELATED IMPACTS WOULD BE
CAPTURED IN THE THE THE
INCREASES THAT MISPRISION
TALKED ABOUT PREVIOUSLY DURING
HER PRESENTATION.
SO THIS WOULDN'T REQUIRE
ADDITIONAL RATE INCREASES FOR
ANY OF THE UTILITY FUNDS.
THE NEXT ONE IS THE STORMWATER
FUND STORMWATER COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
THIS PLAN WAS PART OF OUR
BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE TWO YEAR
BUDGET.
BUT WE ARE FROM A LOGISTICAL
STANDPOINT A LITTLE BEHIND
SCHEDULE.
SO WE'RE SEEKING TO DO IS TO
FLIP FLOP BY TWENTY FOUR AND F
Y TWENTY FIVE FUNDING
ALLOWANCES FOR THIS PROJECT.
SO THIS WOULD ALLOW US TO TO
MAKE THE PROJECT WHOLE IN
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY FIVE AN
ADDITIONAL SIXTY SIX THOUSAND
THAT'S ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SIX
THOUSAND THAT WE WON'T BE
SPENDING IN FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
FOUR.
SO IT'S REALLY JUST A MOVING
FUNDS FROM ONE FISCAL YEAR TO
THE NEXT AND THEN THE THIRD IS
THE SANITARY FUND.
THIS IS AN INITIATING PROJECT
THAT WASN'T IDENTIFIED IN THE
PREVIOUS BUDGET TWO YEAR BUDGET
CYCLE.
IT'S ABOUT A FIVE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLAR PROJECT SO IT'S
OVER TWO FISCAL YEARS.
THE FIRST FISCAL YEAR THREE
HUNDRED FIFTY THOUSAND.
AND WHAT YOU'LL SEE WHEN I TALK
ABOUT HORIZON ISSUES A LITTLE
LATER ON IN THE PRESENTATION
AND WE'RE WORKING ON DOING SOME
COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING IN ALL
THREE FUNDS YOU SAW THE WATER
DISTRIBUTION, THE SANITORIA AND
THE STORM AND WE'RE FINDING
THAT WE HAVE A REAL NEED IN
ORDER TO MAKE SURE THAT WE CAN
STAY AHEAD OF WHAT WE MAY BE
SEEING IN TERMS OF DEVELOPMENT
IN SOME OF THESE AREAS.
AND WHEN YOU'LL HEAR FROM MR.
FOURNIER LATER TO TALK ABOUT
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND
INCENTIVIZING GROWTH IN THE
CITY, WE NEED TO MAKE SURE THAT
UTILITIES ARE WELL POSITIONED
TO BE ABLE TO HANDLE THAT AND
THAT'S THE RATIONALE FOR MOVING
THIS PROJECT FORWARD.
>> MOVING ON TO THE STREETS
FUNDS WE HAVE TO TO FUNDS IT
WILL NOT BE DISCUSSING THE
MAJORS AND THE LOCALS ON THE
MAJORS.
WE HAVE SOME VEHICLE
REPLACEMENTS.
THIS HAS ALREADY COME BEFORE
YOU SO IT'S MORE OF A
REFRESHER.
THE ONE POINT FOUR MILLION TO
REPLACE SEVERAL VEHICLES AS
PART OF OUR PUBLIC WORKS FLEET
AND THOSE VEHICLES WILL BE
COMING OUT OF THE RIGHT OF A
MAINTENANCE THAT IS BUDGETED AT
SEVEN AND A HALF MILLION.
SO ONE POINT FOUR MILLION
OF THE SEVEN AND A HALF MILLION
IS ALREADY NOW BEEN DEDICATED
TOWARDS THOSE VEHICLE
REPLACEMENTS.
THE NEXT ITEM IS ROAD DIET
EVALUATION AND THIS CAME FROM A
COUNCIL DIRECTIVE FOR US TO
COME UP WITH A PLAN TO EVALUATE
ROAD DIETS ON MEIJERS BEFORE
2030.
WE'VE IDENTIFIED A FOUR YEAR
PLAN TO DO THAT.
THIS IS THE FUNDING WE WOULD
REQUEST FOR YEAR ONE.
YOU CAN SEE IT'S ONE HUNDRED
AND FIFTY THOUSAND.
WE ALREADY HAVE ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS IN THE BUDGET
SO THIS WILL JUST AUGMENT THAT
TO BE ABLE TO HANDLE WHAT WE
THINK WE NEED IN YEAR ONE TO DO
THAT EVALUATION THAT ONE
HUNDRED FIFTY THOUSAND WOULD BE
PROGRAMED TO COME OUT OF OUR
CAPITAL MAINTENANCE BUDGET
WHICH IS ESTABLISHED AT SIX
HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND AND
THAT'S USED FOR THINGS LIKE
CRACKED CEILING ON MAJOR ROADS.
SO WE'LL BE DOING A LITTLE LESS
OF THAT IN ORDER TO ACCOMMODATE
THIS REQUEST BY COUNCIL AND
THEN ON THE LOCALS WE HAVE FIVE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS IN
TRAFFIC COMING.
WE HAVE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS BUDGETED FOR
TRAFFIC COMING INITIATIVES IN
THE THE COUNTY HEALTH VILLAGE
THAT GETS ALLOCATED FOR THIS
PURPOSE THE ADDITIONAL FIVE
HUNDRED THOUSAND WOULD ALLOW US
TO GET CAUGHT UP WITH THE
BACKLOG OF ONES THAT HAVE
ALREADY BEEN EVALUATED THAT
YOU'VE SEEN AND NOW WE NEED TO
DO IMPLEMENTATION OF .
SO THIS WILL HELP US MOVE
FORWARD.
WE'RE STRUGGLING WITH THE
BACKLOG.
THERE'S A LOT OF DEMAND FOR
THIS PROGRAM SO THAT'S GOING TO
BE SOMETHING I'LL TALK A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT ON HORIZON ISSUES
THAT WE NEED TO BE THINKING
ABOUT A FUNDING SOURCE FOR THAT
IN THE FUTURE.
IT'S SOMETHING WE'RE GOING TO
CONTINUE TO SUPPORT FOR THIS
YEAR IN FISCAL OR TWENTY FIVE
WE WOULD PROPOSE THE FIVE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS TO
COME OUT OF THE FUND BALANCE
FROM RESURFACING.
SO THIS IS SOME BALANCE.
IT HASN'T BEEN USED FROM A
PREVIOUS YEAR THAT'S NOW
AVAILABLE.
SO IT'S IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT
WHEN WE'RE DOING THESE TYPES
OF INITIATIVES THE SIZE OF THE
PIE IS FIXED.
SO IF WE'RE DOING MORE OF ONE
THING LIKE TRAFICON THEN WE
TAKE IT AWAY FROM SOMETHING AND
IN THIS CASE IT WOULD BE DOING
SOME RESURFACING.
SO THERE'S SORT OF THAT NATURAL
TENSION BETWEEN DIFFERENT
MULTIPLE PRIORITIES AND IT
WOULD TAKE ALMOST HALF OF WHAT
THE BALANCE IS THAT EXISTS IN
THE RESURFACING FUND FROM THE
PREVIOUS YEAR.
MOVING ON TO THE SOLID WASTE
FUND, WE HAVE THREE VEHICLE
REPLACEMENTS THAT ARE DUE WE'RE
RIGHT NOW WE'RE ACTUALLY
STRUGGLING WITH KEEPING SOME
OF OUR FLEET IN SERVICE AND
THAT HELPS THAT REALLY IS A
SERVICE DELIVERY ISSUE FOR US.
SO THIS IS A PRETTY IMPORTANT
PRIORITY IN ORDER TO GET THESE
VEHICLES REPLACED.
SO THAT'S AN IMPORTANT ASK.
THE NEXT ONE IS ROUTE
OPTIMIZATION SOFTWARE FOR A
SOLID WASTE VEHICLES WE HAVEN'T
DONE LOOKED AT THE ROUTES IN
OVER A DECADE.
WE'VE HAD A FAIR BIT OF GROWTH
AND THIS ALSO PROVIDES US AN
OPPORTUNITY TO LOOK AT
EFFICIENCIES.
SO IF WE OPTIMIZE THE ROUTES
THERE'S AN OPPORTUNITY TO
POTENTIALLY REDUCE EQUIPMENT
COSTS AND POTENTIALLY OVER TIME
FOR THE FOLKS WHO ARE WORKING
ON THOSE ROUTES, WE THINK IT'S
A GOOD INVESTMENT IN ORDER TO
GET CURRENT WITH WHAT THE
CURRENT SERVICE AREA THAT WE
ARE WE'RE SERVING.
AND THEN THE THIRD ITEM IS SOME
TEMPORARY STAFF TO HELP SUPPORT
OUR FALL COMPOST COLLECTION.
I THINK THAT'S PRETTY
SELF-EXPLANATORY BUT OBVIOUSLY
WE HAVE ALL OF THE BAGS PUT OUT
HELP HAVING SOME TEMPORARY
STAFF TO HELP US GET THROUGH
THE ROUTES WHICH IS REALLY
DIFFICULT TO GET THROUGH DURING
THE COMPOST SEASON.
WE'RE TYPICALLY WORKING, YOU
KNOW, OVER HAVING THE
ADDITIONAL STAFF SUPPORT THERE
HELPS US BECOME MORE EFFICIENT
AND GET DONE WITHIN THE
APPROPRIATE AMOUNT OF TIME AT
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR'S
REQUEST WE HAVE TAKEN A LOOK
WITH OUR PUBLIC WORKS TEAM
ABOUT HOW HOW CAN WE IMPROVE
OUR RESPONSE TO SNOW REMOVAL.
WE KNOW THAT THAT WAS A
SENSITIVE ISSUE FOR A LOT
OF YOU AND YOUR CONSTITUENTS
THIS WINTER WE'VE HAD A COUPLE
OF CHALLENGING STORMS TO DEAL
WITH.
SO IN THIS BUDGET REQUEST FOR
NEXT YEAR WE'RE ASKING FOR AN
ADDITIONAL FIVE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS TO DO A FEW
THINGS.
ONE IS TO USE CONTRACT SERVICES
TO HELP SUPPORT SOME OF THE
WORK THAT WE'RE DOING,
PARTICULARLY IN THE LOCAL AREAS
.
I THINK AS YOU ALL KNOW, WE'RE
FOCUSING PRIMARILY WHEN WE'RE
DOING SNOW REMOVAL ON MAJORS IN
THE STATE, THE SAFE ROUTES TO
SCHOOL.
SO THE LOCALS TEND TO TRAIL
THIS CONTRACT ASSISTANCE WOULD
ALLOW US TO HAVE A CONTRACTOR
WORK IN THE LOCAL AREAS WHILE
WE'RE WORKING ON THE MAJORS AND
HELP US GET IN THAT SPACE LAST
YEAR AND WE THINK THAT WOULD
IMPROVE OUR RESPONSE.
WE ALSO ARE PROPOSING TO LOOK
AT ADDITIONAL SALTING AND LOCAL
ROADS.
SO THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WE
HAVE THE CAPACITY TO DO WITH
THE THE REAL THE COST REALLY IS
FOR THE ADDITIONAL MEDIA THAT
WE'D BE USING ASSAULT.
THERE IS AN ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT TO THIS SO IT'S
SOMETHING THAT WE WANT TO BE
INTENTIONAL ABOUT IF THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT WE WANT TO DO
BUT WE DID WANT TO RAISE IT AS
AN OPTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND
THE THIRD ITEM IS TO USE
CONTRACT SUPPORT TO HELP
ADDRESS RIGHT AWAY'S AND REFUSE
REFUGE ISLANDS.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT RIGHT
NOW PARKS IS HELPING TO
SUPPORT.
SO IF WE WERE CONTRACTING THIS
OUT THAT WOULD FREE UP SOME
OF THEIR STAFF TO WORK ON
THINGS THAT THEY NEED TO BE
DOING WHICH IS BEING GETTING
THE PARKS CLEARED IN THE PAST
CLEARED.
SO WE THINK THAT'S
INAPPROPRIATE USE OF RESOURCES
IS TO CONTRACT SOME OF THAT
OUT.
AND THEN THE LAST ITEM WHICH I
KNOW I'VE HEARD A LOT FROM
COUNSEL ABOUT IS LOOKING AT HOW
WE CAN KEEP VEHICLES OFF THE
STREET SO WE CAN BE MORE
EFFICIENT AT GETTING THE
STREETS CLEARED.
SO WE'RE WORKING AND I THINK
SOME OF YOU ARE ALSO WORKING
WITH LEGAL ON WHAT THAT WOULD
LOOK LIKE.
BUT WE DO HAVE THE ABILITY TO
IMPLEMENT EMERGENCY CONDITIONS
WHERE WE CAN BAN CARS FROM
PARKING ON THE STREET,
ALTERNATE DAY STREET PARKING.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF DIFFERENT
OPTIONS THAT WE'LL BE LOOKING
AT AND THAT WILL BRING FORTH
FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION TO
IMPLEMENT NEXT WINTER.
THERE REALLY WOULDN'T BE A
MATERIAL COST TO THAT BUT WE
WOULD WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
THERE WAS ADEQUATE ENFORCEMENT
IN ORDER TO MAKE SURE THAT IT'S
EFFECTIVE IN THE ABSENCE.
I'M KNOW I'M NOT NEARLY AS
DYNAMIC AS MISSY BUT I'M GOING
TO GIVE YOU MY BEST HERE.
BUT THE MUNICIPAL ENERGY
UTILITY SO THIS IS A REQUEST IN
THE BUDGET TO DO THE PHASE TWO
STUDY TO GET AN APPRAISAL
OF THESE CITY ASSETS.
WE ESTIMATE THAT COULD COST
UPWARDS OF SEVEN FIGURES WILL
BE THIS WOULD BE AN IMPORTANT
STEP IF THE COMMUNITY AT SOME
POINT DECIDES TO BRING A BALLOT
INITIATIVE TOGETHER TO LOOK AT
MOVING FORWARD WITH THE
FORMATION OR THE EXPLORATION
OF PUBLIC ENERGY UTILITY FOR
ANN ARBOR.
SO THIS IS A STEP THAT WE'VE
IDENTIFIED TO BE INCLUDED IN
THE FISCAL YEAR.
TWENTY FIVE BUDGET FOR
CONSIDERATION.
SO THOSE ARE THE BUDGET IMPACTS
NOW WILL QUICKLY MOVE ON TO THE
HORIZON ISSUES.
SO I TALKED ABOUT THE
STRUCTURAL ISSUES AT THE DAMS
AND ALL.
WE HAVE FOUR DAMS I THINK
YOU'RE FAMILIAR WITH.
THEY WERE ALL BUILT NEARLY 19
HUNDREDS.
WE'RE FACING SOME SIMILAR
ISSUES AT ALL OF THEM SOME
OF THE CHALLENGES THAT WE HAVE
WELL TWO THE DAMS ARE FUNDED BY
PROPORTIONATELY THE GENERAL
FUND ARE TWO THAT HAVE
HYDROPOWER BUT THE OTHER TWO
DAMS, JETTIES AND AAGOT ARE
CURRENTLY FUNDED BY PARKSON AND
THERE'S A TENSION THERE BECAUSE
THE MONEY THAT WE TEND TO USE
FOR THE DAMS TAKES AWAY FROM
THE IMPORTANT THINGS THAT WE
NEED TO DO IN THE PARKS.
SO THAT'S GOING TO BE A HORIZON
ISSUE THAT WE THINK THAT WE'RE
GOING TO NEED TO DISCUSS AS THE
THE NEEDS FOR THE DAMS ARE
GOING TO COME GREATER AS THEY
AGE AND THEY'RE NOT CHEAP AS
YOU CAN IMAGINE.
SO FIGURING OUT A FUNDING
SOURCE SO WE CAN MAKE SURE THAT
WE CAN SUSTAINABLY KEEP THE
DAMS IN GOOD REPAIR AND ALSO BE
ABLE TO MAINTAIN PARKS AT THOSE
SERVICE LEVEL THAT OUR
COMMUNITY EXPECTS IS GOING TO
BE AN IMPORTANT ISSUE FOR US TO
CONSIDER DOWN THE ROAD.
>> APOLOGIZE FOR THE FUZZY
PICTURE HERE BUT THIS IS A
PICTURE OF GATTI'S DAM WHICH
HAS PULLED VICKSBURG ROAD GOING
OVER IT AND THEN THE NEW
DECHAMBEAU ROAD WHICH IS THE
ELEVATED ONE.
SO THESE ARE BOTH OWNED AND
OPERATED BY THE WASHTENAW
COUNTY ROAD COMMISSION.
THE OLD VICKSBURG ROAD USED TO
GO ALL THE WAY THROUGH CROSS
THE TRAIN TRACKS.
NOW IT DEAD ENDS THERE SO YOU
CAN'T GO ALL THE WAY THROUGH
REALLY.
THE OLD DIXIE ROAD BRIDGE NOW
SERVES TWO PURPOSES.
ONE IS TO PROVIDE ACCESS TO
GALLET PARK BECAUSE BECAUSE
THERE'S A TRAIL ON THE OTHER
SIDE AND THE OTHER IS TO HELP
SERVICE THE DAM SO WE USE IT TO
DO TO MAINTAIN THE DAM AND THE
INFRASTRUCTURE ASSOCIATED WITH
IT SUCH AS THE GATES.
THE THAT BRIDGE HAS BEEN
DETERIORATING.
THE ROSHANAK COUNTY ROAD
COMMISSION DOESN'T HAVE
RESOURCES TO INVEST IN KEEPING
IT IN GOOD REPAIR.
THEY'VE RECENTLY DEGRADED AND
THEY PUT JERSEY BARRIERS TO NOW
IT'S A SINGLE LANE BRIDGE AS
OPPOSED TO A TWO LANE BRIDGE
AND THAT'S THEIR STRATEGY
MOVING FORWARD THAT IN THE LONG
RUN IS NOT GOING TO WORK FOR
THE CITY BECAUSE WE NEED TO
MAINTAIN THE LOW RATING TO
ENABLE US TO DO THE WORK THAT
WE NEED TO DO.
LIKE IF WE HAD TO GET A CRANE
OUT THERE WHICH WE HAD TO DO
SEVERAL YEARS AGO WHEN WE HAD A
GATE FAILURE.
SO WE WERE GOING TO BE
INVESTIGATING, YOU KNOW, WHAT
DOES THAT MEAN FOR THE CITY?
THEY WOULD LIKE US TO TAKE
OWNERSHIP OVER OF IT.
THEY SAY THEY'LL GIVE US A
REALLY, REALLY GOOD PRICE.
I THINK THEY'LL JUST GIVE IT TO
US ACTUALLY AND THAT WOULD BE A
LIABILITY THAT WE WOULD BE
INCURRING IN THE LONG RUN AND
BASED ON THE CURRENT FUNDING
FOR THE YETI'S DAM, THE BRIDGE
WOULD ALSO LIKELY AT THIS
CURRENT STATE OF , YOU KNOW, BE
FUNDED BY THE PARKS VILLAGE
WHICH WOULD BE ANOTHER
CHALLENGE FOR PARKS.
SO WE NEED TO LOOK AT THIS IN
THE LONG RUN AND FIGURE OUT
WHAT OUR STRATEGY IS IF WE ARE
GOING TO HAVE TO TAKE OWNERSHIP
OF THAT.
AND AGAIN, SOMETHING IT'S A
HORIZON ISSUE THAT WE'LL NEED
TO EXPLORE ON SOLID WASTE.
SO A FEW ITEMS THERE.
ONE IS A DROP OFF STATION.
I THINK YOU'RE ALL YOU ALL KNOW
IT'S SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
WORKING ON.
WE'RE HOPING TO BRING SOMETHING
TO YOU FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION
OVER THE COMING MONTHS WE'VE
BEEN WORKING WITH A CONSULTANT
AND OUR PARTNERS INCLUDING
RECYCLE ANN ARBOR TO COME UP
WITH WHAT WE THINK FINANCIALLY
SUSTAINABLE SOLUTION IS FOR
HAVING A DROP OFF STATION SERVE
THE REGION BECAUSE THIS WOULD
BE NOT JUST IN ANN ARBOR
FACILITY BUT A REGIONAL
FACILITY.
SO IT'S SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
WORKING ON BUT WE WANT ALSO THE
REASON I'M RAISING THIS IS A
HORIZON ISSUE IS SOLID WASTE AS
A SINGLE MILLAGE AND WE'RE WE
KEEP ON ASKING MORE OF IT.
WE KNOW THAT WE WANT TO EXPAND
OUR CIRCULAR ECONOMY.
WE WANT TO POTENTIALLY CONSIDER
A GROWING COMMERCIAL COMPOSTING
THESE SERVICES AND ALL OF THEM
WILL COST ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
WHERE WE KNOW WE'RE EXPLORING
RIGHT NOW WHEN WE DO MOVE OUT
FOR THE UNIVERSITY MISSION WITH
MICHIGAN WHICH WILL BE
HAPPENING SOON HAVING SOME
CIRCULAR ECONOMY COMPONENTS
THERE.
SO WE'RE NOT JUST THROWING
EVERYTHING AWAY.
UNFORTUNATELY IT'S A LOT
CHEAPER JUST TO THROW
EVERYTHING AWAY.
BUT IF WE WANT TO EXPLORE
OPPORTUNITIES LIKE THIS, WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE TO FIGURE OUT HOW
WE'RE GOING TO BE ABLE TO FUND
THEM AND THERE'S A LOT
OF TENSION AND PULL ON SOLID
WASTE RIGHT NOW TO DO ALL THESE
DIFFERENT THINGS ON THE STREET
ON THE STREET FUNDS.
I THINK LAST YEAR WE PUT IN
ABOUT TWELVE MILES OF BICYCLE
LANES AND WE'RE ANTICIPATED TO
DO MAYBE FIVE MORE MILES THIS
YEAR.
WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO ABSORB THAT
WITH OUR CURRENT STAFF.
WE HAD BASICALLY ONE PERSON
WHO'S DEDICATED TO DEALING WITH
KEEPING THEM CLEAN AND
MAINTAINING THE BIKE FACILITIES
AS WE CONTINUE TO ADD MORE
THAT'S GOING TO PUT SOME STRESS
ON OUR STREETS FUNDS FROM A
MAINTENANCE STANDPOINT AND AT
SOME POINT YOU'LL SEE WHEN I
TALK ABOUT FUTURE STAFF NEEDS
POSSIBLY ANOTHER NEED WHEN WE
ADD LITTLE BITS OF A TIME IT
DOESN'T NECESSARILY EACH
INDIVIDUAL ITEM DOESN'T REQUIRE
THE NEED FOR ANOTHER FTE BUT AT
SOME POINT YOU REACH THE
TIPPING POINT.
WE'RE APPROACHING THE TIPPING
POINT ALSO ON THE STREETS FUNDS
I TALKED ABOUT RESURFACING
VERSUS COMPETING NEEDS.
WE KNOW WE HAVE A ROAD BOND.
WE KNOW WE HAVE A REALLY STRONG
COMMUNITY FEEL FOR GETTING THE
ROADS IN GOOD CONDITION AND
GETTING OUR PASSER RATINGS UP
AND WE'RE WORKING AGGRESSIVELY
TO TRY TO MOVE THAT FORWARD AS
BEST WE CAN.
BUT THERE'S OTHER DEMANDS
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY THAT WILL
COMPETE AGAINST THOSE FUNDS.
SO THAT'S GOING TO BE A
CHALLENGE THAT TENSION IN THE
FUTURE IS IF WE WANT TO REALLY
ADVANCE OUR RESURFACING NEEDS
THEN IT COULD IMPACT HOW MUCH
WE CAN DO IN SOME OF THESE
OTHER AREAS.
SO SOMETHING THAT WE'LL NEED TO
BE CONTINUING TO TALK ABOUT
WITH YOU ALL AND THEN THE TRUNK
LINE STUDY WE KNOW THIS IS I
THINK IT BE A COUNCIL WORK
SESSION ON THIS COMING UP OVER
THE COURSE OF THE NEXT
FEW
MONTHS.
BUT THIS IS BASICALLY THE CITY
TAKING OVER OWNERSHIP OF SOME
OR ALL OF THE TRUNK LINES THAT
GO THROUGH THE CITY.
THERE'S A LOT OF BENEFIT TO THE
CITY FOR TAKING CONTROL OF IT.
BUT THERE'S APPARENTLY
SUBSTANTIAL COST AND YOU'LL SEE
THAT IN THE STUDY THE THE STATE
SHARED REVENUE THAT WE GET AND
THE CONDITION THAT THE TRUNK
LINES WILL BE DELIVERED TO THE
CITY IN LIKELY WOULDN'T BE A
SUSTAINABLE FINANCIALLY WITH
OUR CURRENT FUNDING MODEL WE
HAVE TO BE STEALING RESOURCES
FROM OTHER THINGS IN ORDER TO
KEEP THOSE NEW TRUNK LINES
MAINTAINED SO YOU DON'T GET
ENOUGH WHEN THEIR OWNERSHIP IS
TRANSFERRED OVER YOU FROM MGT
IN ORDER TO MEET WHAT WE THINK
THE CITY'S EXPECTATIONS
OF CONDITION FOR THOSE ARE.
SO IT'S GOING TO WE'LL HAVE I'M
SURE A ROBUST CONVERSATION
ABOUT THAT BUT THAT'S A HORIZON
ISSUE WILL NEED TO BE DISCUSSED
FOR FOR THE UTILITY FUNDS.
SO ON THE WATER SIDE I THINK
YOU'RE QUITE FAMILIAR WITH THIS
BECAUSE WE JUST CAME TO YOU FOR
APPROVAL OF THE WATER STRATEGIC
PLAN BUT WE'RE IN THE YEAR LIKE
THINK THIS IS GREENISH COLOR.
WHERE ARE WE TO DO THAT AND THE
TREATMENT RECOMMENDATION?
SO TWENTY THREE.
TWENTY FOUR THAT'S WHERE WE'RE
EVALUATING RIGHT NOW.
WE WILL BE CONTINUING WITH OUR
PILOT PLANT IS UP AND RUNNING.
WE'RE STILL WORKING OUT SOME
BUGS BUT OVER THE COURSE OF THE
NEXT YEAR WE INTEND TO GET A
LOT OF GOOD DATA THAT WILL HELP
INFORM THE DECISIONS AND WE
NEED TO MAKE IN TERMS OF WHAT
DOES THE REHABILITATION OF THE
WATER TREATMENT LOOK LIKE FOR
THE NEXT SEVERAL GENERATION?
SO THAT'S REALLY WHAT YOU'LL BE
SEEING OVER THE COURSE OF THE
NEXT YEAR.
THE UTILITY SYSTEM CAPACITY
ANALYZES THOSE ARE THE THREE
ANALYZES THAT I MENTIONED ON
OUR THREE DIFFERENT UTILITIES.
THOSE ARE GOING TO BE REALLY
IMPORTANT HISTORICALLY WE'VE
TAKEN THE POSITION WHERE WE
DON'T REALLY AUGMENT THE
SYSTEM.
WE WE REQUIRE DEVELOPERS TO PAY
FOR WHAT IT COST TO BUILD THE
CAPACITY TO SERVE THEM.
IF WE WERE GOING TO BE SERIOUS
AS A COMMUNITY ABOUT
INCENTIVIZING ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT, DO WE WANT TO BE
AHEAD OF THAT?
WE NEED TO BE SENSITIVE ABOUT
WHAT BOULT ALLOWS US TO DO IN
TERMS OF MAKING INVESTMENTS IN
THE SYSTEM AND HOW THAT COSTS
GETS DISTRIBUTED AMONG OUR
RATEPAYERS.
BUT WHAT WE'RE FINDING WITH
SOME OF THE DEVELOPMENTS THAT
WE'VE BEEN SEEING THAT ARE
LARGE PARTICULARLY ON THE
SANITARY SIDE WHERE THERE'S NOT
SUFFICIENT CAPACITY TO SERVE
SOME OF THESE NEW DEVELOPMENTS,
YOU KNOW THE COST IT REALLY
BECOMES A BARRIER TO GET INTO
THE CITY AND BUILD BECAUSE THE
COSTS ARE SO SUBSTANTIAL TO
IMPROVE THE SYSTEM TO BE ABLE
TO ACCOMMODATE.
SO IT PROBABLY AN APPROPRIATE
CONVERSATION TO BE HAVING IS IS
THERE YOU DO WE WANT TO BE
THINKING ABOUT MAKING SOME
INVESTMENTS SO WE'RE MORE
FRIENDLY TO ALLOW FOLKS WHO
WANT TO DEVELOP TO BE ABLE TO
GET IN AND THE CAPACITY EXISTS
BECAUSE IN SOME OF THESE CASES
THE CAPACITY COULD TAKE YEARS
FOR US TO BUILD AND THAT MIGHT
NOT MEET THE TIMELINE FOR
PEOPLE WHO WANT TO COME AND AND
INVEST IN THE CITY.
SO DEFINITELY A HORIZON ISSUE
AND THAT SORT OF TIES INTO THE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND ZONING
CHANGE THAT WE'VE BEEN
DISCUSSING ON THE WATER SYSTEM.
SO TWO FIGURES HERE AND I'M
GETTING CLOSE ON THE WATER
MAINS BY DECADE INSTALLED.
SO THE ONE ON THE BOTTOM YOU'LL
SEE THAT THERE'S SORT OF A BIG
HUMP AND THAT'S IN THE 1940S,
50S, 60S TIME LINE WHERE MOST
OF OUR INFRASTRUCTURE WAS BUILT
.
AND UNFORTUNATELY WHEN YOU DO
THE MATH AND YOU LOOK AT WHAT
THE LIFE EXPECTANCY OF THAT IS,
YOU'LL SEE A BIG HUMP IN THE
TWENTY TWENTY TO TWENTY FORTIES
WHICH ARE JUST STARTING.
SO WE IN ORDER TO STAY SORT
OF CURRENT AND REPLACE THE
INFRASTRUCTURE AT THE RIGHT
TIME, WE HAVE A BIG INVESTMENT
THAT WE'RE GOING TO BE MAKING
IN THIS IS IN THE DRINKING
WATER BURIED INFRASTRUCTURE
OVER THE COURSE OF THE NEXT
COUPLE OF DECADES AND WE'RE
RIGHT AT THE BEGINNING OF IT
NOW WE HAVEN'T BEEN REPLACING
THINGS AT THE RIGHT RATE IN
ORDER FOR US TO TO FOR THIS TO
BE SUSTAINABLE.
AND AS YOU SEE AS WE GET TO THE
TWENTY FORTIES, YOU KNOW, WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT ALMOST 50 PERCENT
OF THE BURIED INFRASTRUCTURE IN
THE CITY IS GOING TO BE
REACHING THE END OF ITS LIFE
OVER THE NEXT COUPLE
OF DECADES.
WE CAN'T DO THAT ALL IN 10
YEARS OR 20 YEARS.
NOT ONLY WOULD IT JUST BE
HUGELY DISRUPTIVE TO THE
COMMUNITY BUT WE DON'T HAVE THE
FINANCIAL RESOURCES EITHER.
SO WE NEED TO COME UP WITH A
STRATEGY TO ADDRESS THIS IN A
PRIORITIZED MANNER AND TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE ARE ABLE TO AND
THIS IS NOT UNIQUE TO ANN
ARBOR.
THIS IS FACING UTILITIES ALL
OVER THE COUNTRY ARE FACING THE
SAME THING BECAUSE THERE'S A
LOT OF GROWTH IN THE POSTWAR
AREAS.
SO THE TIME THOUGH TO START
THINKING ABOUT AND PLANNING FOR
IT IS NOW.
SO ON STAFFING I MENTIONED
PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT, THE FTE
THAT WE'VE ASKED FOR THIS YEAR
DEPENDING UPON YOU KNOW, WHAT
THE FUTURE HOLDS IN TERMS
OF CONTINUAL GROWTH AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
WE ANTICIPATE THAT THERE COULD
BE ADDITIONAL NEEDS IN THAT
GROUP AND OUR AND OUR
TRANSPORTATION GROUP, THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN, OUR
PUBLIC SCHOOLS ARE BOTH
EMBARKING ON VERY AGGRESSIVE
CAPITAL INVESTMENT CAMPAIGNS
WHICH HAS A BURDEN ON OUR STAFF
TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE STAYING
ON TOP OF THEIR SCHEDULE AND
REVIEWING THINGS APPROPRIATELY
AND THAT REQUIRES RESOURCES AND
WE THINK THAT IT'S POSSIBLE
WE'LL HAVE A CONVERSATION IN A
FUTURE YEAR ABOUT AUGMENTING
OUR STAFF TO SUPPORT SOME
OF THE GROWTH THINGS THAT WE'RE
SEEING IN THE COMMUNITY AND
THEN ON PUBLIC WORKS.
THAT WAS THE PERSON THAT I
TALKED ABOUT AS WE SORT
OF CHANGE OUR TRANSPORTATION
INFRASTRUCTURE TO BE PEDESTRIAN
FRIENDLY ADDING BICYCLE
INFRASTRUCTURE.
IT CHANGES A LITTLE BIT HOW WE
DO OUR WORK AND WE MAY NEED
SOME ADDITIONAL FOLKS IN THE
FUTURE TO HELP SUPPORT SOME
OF THE MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES
WITH THE SORT OF RECONFIGURED
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WE HAVE IN
THE CITY SUSTAINABLE ENERGY
UTILITY WE ANTICIPATE AS AS
COUNCIL CONSIDERS A BALLOT
INITIATIVE FOR THIS OVER THE
COMING MONTHS DEPENDING UPON
THE RESULTS OF THAT IF THERE IS
SUPPORT IN THE COMMUNITY FOR
FORMING A SUSTAINABLE ENERGY
UTILITY, A FUTURE FTE WILL BE
NEEDED TO MEET THAT THAT
CURRENTLY MESI STULTS HAS IN
HER CLIMATE KNOWLEDGE AND SET
ASIDE A BUDGET FOR THIS
POSITION.
SO IT'S SORT OF HELD IN RESERVE
CURRENTLY AND ONCE WE GOT OUT
OF THE GATE AND ACTUALLY THE
UTILITY BECAME SUSTAINABLE THEN
THE RATES FROM THE UTILITY
WOULD SUPPORT THAT POSITION.
BUT WE WOULD NEED SOME FOR SOME
SOME RESOURCES LIKELY FROM
CLIMATE KNOWLEDGE TO SUPPORT
THAT FTE INITIALLY OUT OF THE
GATE.
I THINK THIS MAY BE MY LAST
SLIDE BUT ON THE TREE LINE
TRAIL THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
WAS ADOPTED BY COUNCIL IN
TWENTY SEVENTEEN AND YOU KNOW
THERE'S A COLLABORATIVE
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY AND
THE TREE LINE CONSERVANCY.
WE HAVE A DEDICATED WATER
RESOURCE TO THIS BUT THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT IS AN IMPORTANT
PRIORITY FOR COUNCIL.
AT SOME POINT IN THE FUTURE
THERE WILL NEED TO BE RESOURCES
ALLOCATED IN ORDER TO REALIZE
THE VISION AND THIS IS ACTUALLY
MY LAST SLIDE.
I PROMISE THIS SO I'M NOT GOING
TO SPEND IT BUT THIS IS THE
MONEY STARTED WITH THE MONEY
ENDING WITH THE MONEY MARTY.
SO SO WE'RE WORKING ON A LOT
OF THINGS AND THIS IS REALLY
WE'VE BEEN REALLY SUCCESSFUL.
I'LL CALL OUT OUR
TRANSPORTATION GROUP WHO HAS
DONE AN EXCELLENT JOB
OF GETTING OTHER RESOURCES
HISTORICALLY TO SUPPORT THEIR
WORK SAFE STREETS FOR ALL.
AS AN EXAMPLE, WE'RE GOING TO
CONTINUE TO PURSUE GRANT
OPPORTUNITIES TO HELP GET ALL
OF THE THINGS DONE AND WHAT
I'VE LISTED HERE IS SOME AREAS
WHERE WE WILL BE FOCUSING IN
THE FUTURE.
BUT REALLY THE NUMBER ONE THING
IS THE WATER TREATMENT PLANT
REHAB YOU KNOW, WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT ONE OF THE LARGEST
PROJECTS IN THE HISTORY OF THE
CITY AND DEFINITELY THE HISTORY
OF THE CITY'S WATER SYSTEM OVER
ONE HUNDRED MILLION DOLLARS.
SO WE'LL NEED TO BE LOOKING AT
WHAT TYPE OF GRANT OPPORTUNITY
WE CAN TO SUPPORT THAT.
THAT'S GOING TO BE A MAJOR
PRIORITY.
IT'S BEEN A PRIORITY FOR MR.
FOURNIER AND TALKING ABOUT
EARMARKS WHEN WE'RE SORT
OF GREASING THE SKIDS FOR
THINGS IN THE FUTURE.
BUT THERE'S ALSO A LOT
OF OPPORTUNITIES IN DC THROUGH
LOTS OF DIFFERENT PROGRAMS THAT
ARE AVAILABLE FOR UTILITY
PROJECTS OF THIS SIZE.
SO WE'LL BE PURSUING THAT AND
WITH THAT I WILL TURN IT OVER
TO MR. DELACOURT.
I ALWAYS LOVE GOING AFTER
BRIAN.
IT'S A REMINDER HOW GRATEFUL I
AM.
I DON'T HAVE ANYWHERE NEAR AS
MANY FUNDS AS HE HAS TO DEAL
WITH.
YEAH, SECOND YEAR OF A TWO YEAR
BUDGET WE DID NOT PER DIRECTION
UNLIKE MOST YEARS TO NOT MAKE A
LOT OF CHANGES ARE NOT ASKING
FOR ARE NOT PROPOSING A LOT
OF IMPACTS FOR THE GENERAL FUND
WE ARE TALKING ABOUT HORIZON
ISSUES ACROSS THE BOARD FOR US
IN THE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
AREA.
THE NUMBER ONE THING WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE TO DEAL WITH IN
THE COMING YEARS IS GOING TO BE
THE ADOPTION OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND THE
COSTS THAT ARE GOING TO BE
ASSOCIATED WITH THAT.
WE'RE NOT PROPOSING ANYTHING
THIS YEAR.
WE ARE ASKING FOR WE ARE LOSING
TO LONG TERM STAFF PLANNERS
THAT HAVE ABOUT FIFTY SEVEN
YEARS OF EXPERIENCE BETWEEN THE
TWO OF THEM WE HAVE TALKED
ABOUT AND ARE PROPOSING TO
REPLACE THOSE WITH THREE ENTRY
LEVEL PLANNERS OUT OF THE
GENERAL FUND.
OUR COSTS ARE COVERED FROM WHAT
WE SAVE IN RETIREMENT FUNDS SO
THAT IS GOING TO BE OUR BIG
CHANGE IN THE PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT COMING UP IS THE
REPLACEMENT OF TWO WITH
HOPEFULLY THREE GOING FORWARD
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO WORK
HARD AND BALANCING THOSE
CONCERNS ARE THOSE THE BIG
ISSUE THAT'S GOING TO COME IS
THE BALANCE BETWEEN COUNCIL
PRIORITIES AND THE PLANNING
COMMISSION WORK PLAN MAKING
SURE EVERYBODY'S IN LINE.
THERE'S GOING TO BE A LOT
OF WORK THAT COMES OUT OF THAT
PLAN AND MAKING SURE WE
UNDERSTAND HOW TO IMPLEMENT
THAT IS PROBABLY GOING TO BE
WHAT'S MOST IMPORTANT THE
PLANNING PROCESS AS DIFFICULT
AS IT IS, IS GOING TO BE EASY
IN COMPARISON TO THE ADOPTION
OF THE ORDINANCES THAT ARE
NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT IT.
AND WE THINK ONCE THE PLAN'S
DONE AT THE END OF THE YEAR
COMING UP AS WE'VE SEEN
RECENTLY WITH C ONE AND SOME
OF THE OTHER ORDINANCES REALLY
WORKING WITH THE COMMUNITY TO
DEVELOP AND ADOPT THOSE
ORDINANCES ARE GOING TO TAKE A
LOT OF TIME AND EFFORT AND WE
JUST WANT EVERYBODY TO REALIZE
THAT AS WE GO FORWARD WITH THAT
IT'S GOING TO TAKE A LOT
OF PATIENCE AS WE BRING THAT
FORWARD TO IMPLEMENT WHATEVER
THOSE RESULTS ARE WE'RE NOT
PROPOSING ANY BIG CHANGES IN
THE BUDGET.
LIKE I SAID, WE'VE WORKED WITH
HAMILTON TRY TO MAKE SURE THE
STAFFING IS THERE AND THAT THE
SAVINGS WE GET FROM RETIREMENTS
WILL REPLACE THE PLANNING
DEPARTMENT STAFF
THAT'S THERE.
BUT THE MAJORITY OF THEIR TIME
NOW IS SPENT MOVING PROJECTS
THROUGH THE SYSTEM.
THE TIME AND EFFORT IT'S GOING
TO TAKE TO ENGAGE WITH THE
COMMUNITY TO WORK WITH THEM ON
THE ADOPTION AND THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN
GOALS TURNING THOSE INTO
ORDINANCES AND CODIFYING THEM
IN A WAY THAT IS ACTUALLY
IMPLEMENTABLE WITH ALL THE
OTHER THINGS WE'VE HEARD THAT
GO INTO THAT UTILITIES AND
EVERYTHING ELSE IS GOING TO
PROBABLY BE A LONGER PROCESS
THAN EVERYBODY REALIZES AND
IT'S GOING TO TAKE CAPACITY SO
WE'RE NOT GOING TO BE ABLE TO
IMPLEMENT EVERYBODY'S GOING TO
WE'RE GOING TO GET DONE WITH A
PLAN AND EVERYBODY'S GOING TO
BE VERY EXCITED AND THE PLAN IS
GOING TO HAVE A LOT OF THINGS
SHE WANTS TO DO ON IT AND
MAKING SURE THAT WE TAKE THOSE
IN IN ORDER AND IN A WAY THAT
WE HAVE THE CAPACITY TO
IMPLEMENT.
WELL, IS GOING TO BE WHAT'S
IMPORTANT WHEN THAT'S FINISHED.
SO AGAIN, NOT A LOT OF BUDGET
ISSUES HERE BUT JUST A
CONVERSATION OVER THE COMING
YEARS ABOUT THE CAPACITY OF THE
PLANNING DEPARTMENT, THE LOSS
OF THOSE PLANNERS.
WE HAVE ABOUT FIVE PLANNERS
RIGHT NOW.
WE KNOW THE MAJORITY OF THEIR
TIME EVEN WITH THE REPLACEMENTS
ARE GOING TO BE SPENT ON MOVING
PROJECTS THROUGH THE SYSTEM.
WE'VE HEARD THOSE ARE IMPORTANT
TO REVENUE SO WE WILL HAVE A
LOT OF CONVERSATIONS ABOUT
THAT.
BUT WE APPRECIATE THE HOPEFULLY
THE ABILITY TO REPLACE THOSE
TWO LONG TERM PLANNERS WITH THE
THREE ENTRY LEVEL POSITIONS AND
GROW THAT DEPARTMENT BUILDING
AND RENTAL THIS IS RELATIVELY
EASY FOR US.
IT COMES OUT OF THE
CONSTRUCTION FUND THIS IS ONE
OF THE OTHER FUNDS OTHER THAN
THE GENERAL FUND WE HAVE THAT
PAYS FOR THINGS.
>> WE TOOK A LITTLE PAUSE
THROUGH COVID AND DIDN'T WE'RE
KIND OF WAITING TO SEE WHAT
THAT IMPACT THAT WAS GOING TO
HAVE ON THE PROJECTS AND THE
DEVELOPMENT THAT CAME THROUGH
THE SYSTEM.
>> WE SAW VERY LITTLE SLOW DOWN
RECOVERED AND IT'S SEEN AN
INCREASED SENSE.
SO WHAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT IS
USING THE CONSTRUCTION FUND IT
HAS A HEALTHY BALANCE.
IT CONTINUES TO GROW.
WE'RE GOING TO WE HAVE PROPOSED
IN THIS YEAR'S BUDGET TO ADD
THREE TRADE INSPECTORS WHICH
YOU WOULD THINK WOULD BE SIMPLE
ENOUGH TO DO WE HAVE A HARD
TIME FINDING QUALIFIED TRADE
INSPECTORS NOW WE SPEND QUITE A
BIT OF MONEY SUPPLEMENTING THAT
WITH CONTRACTORS TO TRY TO KEEP
UP WITH DEMAND.
THE IMPORTANCE OF INSPECTORS IS
IS REALLY SIGNIFICANT IN THAT
ONE.
IT KEEPS PROJECTS MOVING WHEN
WE CAN'T GET OUT TO A SITE,
WHEN WE CAN'T GET THE
INSPECTIONS DONE, THE PROJECT
SLOWS DOWN THAT CAUSES BACKLOG
FOR EVERYBODY, DOESN'T HELP OUR
REPUTATION IN THE COMMUNITY AND
TO IT'S AN ENCOURAGEMENT OR
IT'S AN INDUCEMENT FOR THEM TO
SKIP THE INSPECTIONS ALTOGETHER
AND MOVE ON WITH THE PROJECT
WHICH WE ALL KNOW WHAT KIND
OF PROBLEM THAT CAN CAUSE WE
HAVE THE DEMAND FOR THESE
INSPECTORS.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THREE TRADE
INSPECTORS IN THE MECHANICAL
PLUMBING AREA TO TO INCREASE
THAT.
THE OTHER THING WE'RE DOING IS
WE HAD HOPED THAT THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DREAM
WOULD SIMPLIFY THE PROCESS TO
THE POINT WHERE WE WOULDN'T
NEED TO HAND HOLD FOLKS AS MUCH
AS WE DID.
>> WE DO IT'S DIFFERENT AND THE
FOLKS WE HAVE TO HANDHOLD ARE A
LITTLE DIFFERENT.
BUT WHAT WE ARE ALSO PROPOSING
IS HIRING A PERMIT LIAISON THAT
WOULD BE SOMEONE WHO IS A
SINGLE POINT OF CONTACT FOR
ANYBODY MOVING A BUILDING
PERMIT THROUGH THE SYSTEM RIGHT
NOW A BUILDING PERMIT SOUNDS
LIKE A RELATIVELY SIMPLE THING
BUT IT CAN TOUCH ON FIVE, SIX
DIFFERENT AREAS IN THE CITY AND
FOR THOSE WHO ARE LESS SKILLED
OR THOSE WHO UTILIZE OR USE OUR
OUR SOFTWARE LESS, IT CAN
BECOME A DIFFICULT PROCESS.
SO WHAT WE'RE HOPING TO DO IS
BRING ONE PERSON IN WHO IS
THERE TO CONSTANTLY PICK UP THE
PHONE, MEET WITH PEOPLE AT THE
COUNTER, HELP THEM FIND THEIR
PERMIT IS IN THE PROCESS,
ESPECIALLY WHEN WE'RE DEALING
WITH THE SMALLER RESIDENTIAL
BUILDING COMMUNITY.
WE HAVE A LOT OF RESIDENTS WHO
PULL THEIR OWN PERMITS TO DO
WORK THAT CAN BE A DAUNTING
SITUATION ANY COMMUNITY.
SO WE'RE HOPEFUL THAT THAT
PERSON CAN BE A BE SOMEONE TO
HELP THEM GET THROUGH THE
SYSTEM EASILY ANSWER ALL THOSE
QUESTIONS SO THAT'S THERE AS
WELL.
ALL THOSE POSITIONS ARE
DESIGNED TO HELP IMPROVE
CUSTOMER SERVICE.
IT DOES TOUCH ON THE WORK THAT
JOHN AND THE CITY
ADMINISTRATORS OFFICE IS DOING
ON IMPROVING PROCESS AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
WE THINK THE NUMBER ONE WAY WE
CAN DO THAT IS HELP PEOPLE GET
THROUGH THE PROCESS AND THEN
THE OTHER THING WE'RE
CONSIDERING IS IS I HAVEN'T
EVEN TOLD MILTON THIS YET BUT I
STUCK IT ON THE SLIDE BECAUSE I
WAS HOPING YOU WOULD TELL HIM
IT WAS A GREAT IDEA IS MAYBE
SPENDING A LITTLE BIT OF THE
CONSTRUCTION FUND ON AN AUDIT
THE DEPARTMENT THERE ARE THERE
ARE PLACES THAT WE CAN GO AND
WE'RE PROBABLY AT THE POINT A
STREAM IMPLEMENTATION MAYBE
CONSIDERING BRINGING IN AN
OUTSIDE RESOURCE TO AUDIT HOW
OUR PROCESS WORKS EVERYTHING WE
DO NOT SOMETHING THAT'S
DESIGNED TO FIND FAULT BUT TO
FIND WAYS WE CAN FIND
EFFICIENCY AND IMPROVE THE
PROCESS THROUGHOUT THE
DEPARTMENT.
SO WE ARE THINKING ABOUT DOING
THAT WOULD COME OUT OF THE
CONSTRUCTION FUND NOT THE
GENERAL FUND.
BUT WE THINK WITH THESE
POSITIONS IN PLACE THAT WE CAN
DO THAT.
WE ALSO PUT IN THERE AND I
DIDN'T PUT ON THE SLIDE IT IS
REALLY HARD FOR US TO FIND
POSITIONS IN THE BUILDING
DEPARTMENT AND THE TRADE
INSPECTIONS WE'RE GOING TO
WE'VE PUT IN ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLAR ONE TIME COST
THIS YEAR TO HELP H.R. DO
DIRECT RECRUITING OF INSPECTION
STAFF.
SO IN HOPE WITH WITH THREE OR
FOUR POSITIONS HIRING WE THINK
THAT'S A GOOD EXPENSE AND THINK
IT'LL BE WORTHWHILE TO GET THEM
ALL IN HERE AT THE SAME TIME
RENTAL SERVICE OUR WHOLE GOAL
IS ALWAYS WE HAVE WE'RE ABLE TO
DO ABOUT 6000 RENTAL
INSPECTIONS A YEAR.
I THINK WE HAVE THIRTY THOUSAND
RENTAL UNITS.
WE TRY TO GET THEM IN EVERY TWO
OR THREE YEARS.
THE MATH JUST DOESN'T ADD UP.
WE HAVE SIX RENTAL INSPECTORS.
WE'RE NOT ASKING FOR IT THIS
YEAR.
THEY'RE PAID FOR OUT OF THE
GENERAL FUND.
BUT OUR GOAL IS TO SHOW COVID
SET US BACK BUT TO SHOW THAT
EACH INDIVIDUAL RENTAL
INSPECTOR IS ABLE TO
COVER THEIR OWN COSTS AND
HOPEFULLY NEXT YEAR IF WE'RE
ABLE TO DEMONSTRATE THAT WE'LL
BE BACK ASKING FOR SOME MORE.
WE'D REALLY LIKE TO GET INTO
THE RENTAL PROPERTIES MORE
OFTEN.
SO AND ALSO WE'VE SEEN WITH THE
RENTERS COMMISSION SOME OTHER
THINGS WE'D LIKE TO BE ABLE TO
GET TO THOSE CONCERNS ON A MORE
REGULAR BASIS AS WELL.
THIS IS WHAT KEEPS ME UP AT
NIGHT AS I'VE TOLD MILTON AND
EVERYBODY HEARS ME RUNNING
AROUND SCREAMING AND BANGING ON
TABLES AT CITY HALL ABOUT I
APPRECIATE BRIAN'S COMMENTS THE
PUBLIC SERVICE DEPARTMENT AND
BRIAN HAVE BEEN EXCELLENT IN
THESE CONVERSATIONS.
WE HAVE A CAPITAL SHORTFALL IN
PARKS THAT IS COMING TO
FRUITION OVER THE NEXT 20 OR 30
YEARS.
THAT IS SIGNIFICANT.
I WILL ADD ON THE DISBURSAL
BRIDGE ECONOMY WAS NICE ENOUGH.
WE ACTUALLY OFFERED TO TAKE THE
BRIDGE IF THEY WOULD JUST BRING
UP TO STANDARD AND I THINK THE
PEOPLE WITH NO WHICH I WAS A
LITTLE DISAPPOINTED WITH I
DIDN'T WANT TO TAKE IT IN THE
FIRST PLACE BUT WE HAVE THESE
THINGS IN THE DAM REBUILD THE
DAM REHABILITATIONS THE DIKES
BROADBRIDGE THE ADA IS A KNOWN
COST THAT'S TWENTY MILLION
DOLLARS IN TODAY'S DOLLARS AS
WE IMPLEMENT THAT THOSE
IMPROVEMENTS OVER THE NEXT 20
YEARS THAT'S GOING TO GET MORE
EXPENSIVE.
>> WE'VE STARTED A CAPITAL
STUDY THIS YEAR WITH COMPANY TO
STUDY ALL OF IRAQ'S CAPITAL
ASSETS.
WE WE ANTICIPATE CONSERVATIVELY
SEVENTY FIVE MILLION DOLLARS IN
COSTS TO COME OUT OF THAT.
HOPEFULLY IT'S NOT MUCH MORE
BUT IT'S GOING TO BE A
SIGNIFICANT COST.
WE KNOW RIGHT NOW WE HAVE
PLAYGROUND'S AT THE END OF LIFE
VETERANS FRANK NEEDS HELP.
THESE ARE EXAMPLES OF ALL THE
COSTS THAT ARE GOING TO COME
DUE OVER THE NEXT TEN OR TWENTY
YEARS THAT THE CURRENT FUNDING
SOURCES THERE ISN'T ENOUGH
MONEY TO COVER AND WE ARE GOING
TO WORK WITH MILTON OVER THE
NEXT YEAR TO BRING NOT THIS
YEAR BUT HOPEFULLY NEXT YEAR A
FUNDING PLAN FOR AT LEAST THE
NEXT FIVE OR TEN YEARS HOW TO
START TO TACKLE THESE ITEMS IN
A REASONABLE MANNER.
OTHERWISE THEY'RE JUST GOING TO
CONTINUE TO DETERIORATE, FALL
APART AND BECOME MORE COSTLY.
>> THE WAY WE WANT TO LOOK AT
THAT IS IS OBVIOUSLY THERE IS
NO ONE MAGIC BULLET THAT'S
GOING TO FIX THIS FOR PARKS.
WE'VE STARTED THE CAPITAL STUDY
.
ONE OF THE INITIAL THINGS WE
WANT TO TALK ABOUT IS THE PARKS
MILLAGE COMES DUE IN TWENTY SIX
FOR RENEWAL.
WE ARE NOT CURRENTLY LOOKING AT
INCREASING THAT.
WE ARE WORKING WITH FINANCE
ABOUT THE POTENTIAL TO EXTEND
THE YEARS OF IT.
I THINK IT'S SIX YEARS RIGHT
NOW IF WE EXTEND THE YEARS
OF IT WE MAY BE ABLE TO BOND
AGAINST IT IN A MANNER THAT
WOULD ALLOW US TO RAISE SOME
CAPITAL TO DO SOME THINGS
WITHOUT RAISING THE COST OF THE
MILLAGE.
OBVIOUSLY OUR FEE EVALUATION IS
GOING TO HAVE TO BE PART
OF THAT SPONSORSHIP GRANTS
PUBLIC PARTNERSHIPS I THINK
COUNCIL TALKED ABOUT IT THE
OTHER NIGHT NOT ONLY THE GOLF
COURSES BUT I THINK AN
EVALUATION OF PARK OWNED
PROPERTY TO SEE IF THERE'S
ANYTHING THAT COULD BE
MONETIZED OR GENERATE REVENUE
POTENTIALLY TO MEET OTHER
COUNCIL PRIORITIES WHETHER IT'S
SUSTAINABILITY, WHETHER IT'S
AFFORDABLE HOUSING THAT WOULD
HELP RECOUP REVENUE FOR THE
PARKS SYSTEM.
WE DON'T WANT TO GET THERE BUT
ARE THERE SERVICES THAT ARE
OUTDATED OR ARE NO LONGER
NECESSARY FOR THE COMMUNITY AND
AND LASTLY, ONCE ALL OF THOSE
THINGS HAVE BEEN EVALUATED, DO
WE HAVE TO LOOK AT AN
ADDITIONAL MILLAGE OR BOND IN
THE SHORT TERM TO PAY FOR SOME
OF THESE CAPITAL ASSETS BEFORE
THEY GET TO THE POINT WHERE
THEY'RE NOT RECOUPABLE, WHERE
THEY'RE NOT ABLE TO BE REPAIRED
AND ACTUALLY MORE COSTLY THAT
IS PARKS PRIORITY OVER THE NEXT
YEAR.
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE THINKING
ABOUT OVER THE NEXT YEAR WE
HOPE TO HAVE MORE THOUGHT
THROUGH PLAN WE HOPE TO HAVE A
MORE THOUGHT THROUGH PLAN ON
HOW TO ACCOMPLISH THIS NEXT
YEAR BUT WE WANTED TO PUT IT
OUT THERE THIS YEAR IS
SOMETHING TO THINK FORWARD
ABOUT AND GIVE YOU GUYS
SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUT THIS
YEAR.
THAT IS ALL I HAVE TODAY.
LIKE I SAID MOST WE DID ASK FOR
ONE FTE IN PARKS THAT WAS PAID
FOR THROUGH MOVING SOME FUNDING
SOURCES AROUND BETWEEN EXISTING
FUNDS.
THERE'S NO ADDITIONAL COST TO
THE GENERAL FUND.
MILTON WAS KIND ENOUGH TO
APPROVE THAT ALREADY AND WE'RE
ALREADY IN THE HIRING PROCESS
FOR THAT PLAN THAT WE'VE REALLY
HAD NO SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON
THE GENERAL FUND THIS YEAR.
WE THINK THAT CONVERSATION FOR
US COMES NEXT YEAR THROUGH THE
PARKS CONVERSATION.
>> SO WITH THAT I DIDN'T BRING
MY STAFF BECAUSE THEY LIKE ME
BETTER WHEN I DON'T ASK THEM TO
COME HERE AND THAT'S IMPORTANT
TO ME.
BUT WE WILL CERTAINLY ANSWER
ANY QUESTIONS YOU HAVE ON
GOOD
EVENING.
I'M HERE TO TALK ABOUT
DIVERSITY, EQUITY AND INCLUSION
THROUGH THE OFFICE
OF ORGANIZATIONAL EQUITY.
I'M GOING TO START OFF WITH
WHAT WE ARE NOT WE ARE NOT
LOCATED IN OR UNDER H.R. WE'RE
A STANDALONE OFFICE AND WE DO
GET A LOT OF CONFUSION ABOUT
WAIT, YOU'RE NOT A PART
OF H.R..
NO, WE'RE LOCATED ARE OUR
OFFICES ARE THERE BUT WE ARE
STANDALONE AND I'LL TALK ABOUT
WHY WE'RE STANDALONE AS WE GO
FORWARD.
SO THE FIRST THING WE'D LIKE TO
DO IS INCREASE OUR VISIBILITY
AND ENGAGEMENT AND KNOWLEDGE
OF THE OEM IMPLEMENTATION
OF OUR EXPERTIZE WE NEED TO
CREATE SOME BRANDING.
WE'VE GOT SOME GREAT PARKS AND
REC BRANDING AND LOTS OF OTHER
AREAS THAT ARE BRANDED AND SO
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
LOOKING TO DO NEXT YEAR AND WE
ARE DEDICATED TO PARTICIPATING
IN COMMUNITY EVENTS THAT WILL
GIVE US STRENGTH, STAKEHOLDER
ENGAGEMENT AND A CONNECTIVITY
TO THE COMMUNITY THAT WE'RE
STILL WORKING TO DEVELOP.
I'VE BEEN HERE ALMOST 18 MONTHS
NOW PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
OUR ACCESSIBILITY COORDINATOR
NEEDS TO GO TO CONFERENCES ONCE
A YEAR TO MAINTAIN THE
CERTIFICATION THAT THEY ARE
CURRENTLY FINISHING UP.
WE HAVE A COUPLE OF OTHER SMALL
THINGS THAT INDIVIDUALLY WE
HAVE I'M A CERTIFIED DIVERSITY
EXECUTIVE THINGS LIKE THAT JUST
CONTINUING TO STAY IN FRONT
OF OUR GI JOURNEY AND I THINK I
KNOW MY PLAN IS TO POSITION ANN
ARBOR AS THE LEADER IN D.E.A
AGE PLUS IN PUBLIC SERVICE NEXT
YEAR.
>> I WAS KIND OF REFERRING TO
WAIT WE'RE LOCATED BUT WE'RE
NOT EVERYTHING BEGINS WITH
EQUITY.
EVERY ONE OF OUR OFFICES AND
DEPARTMENTS AND AREAS HERE IN
THE CITY AS EMPLOYEES WE BELONG
IN AND WE ARE AND WE TALK TO
INDIVIDUALS FROM EVERY
DEPARTMENT ALMOST EVERY DAY AND
HELPING GUIDE THE WAY THAT
EQUITY IS BROUGHT INTO THINGS.
WE WANT TO EMPOWER OUR MY
COLLEAGUES TO SEAMLESSLY
INTEGRATE DEEYAH PLUS INTO
REPORTS, REVIEWS, PROJECT
PROGRAMS.
WE'RE CREATING EASY CHECKLISTS
AND TRAINING AND WE'RE ALSO
LOOKING TO KIND OF PARTNER THIS
IN WITH FUTURE INITIATIVES SUCH
AS PERFORMANCE APPRAISALS THAT
ARE COMING THROUGH TO THE CITY
THAT WILL OF COURSE BRING
BETTER INFORMED DECISION MAKING
THROUGH DATA UTILIZATION AND IT
WILL IMPROVE OUR ACCOUNTABILITY
AND TRANSPARENCY.
RIGHT NOW WE'RE RUNNING AROUND
WITH WEIGHT WHO IS OVER THAT OR
WHO WOULD BE IN CHARGE OF THIS
IF WE WERE GOING TO DO IT IN
SOME AREAS AND SO HAVING
EVERYONE UNDERSTAND WHICH WAY
WE'RE WALKING DOWN A PATH WOULD
HELP IN DOING THE
ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY
.
ALSO LOOKING TO CREATE AN
AMBASSADOR IF YOU DON'T NOTICE
I LOVE ACRONYMS INFUSING D.E.A
PLUS IN EVERY AREA OF THE CITY.
SO WHAT THAT WOULD DO IS WE
WOULD HAVE ONE CITY STAFF IN
EACH AREA WHO WE TRAIN
BASICALLY BRING UP IN A SMALL
CREDENTIALING KIND OF WAY.
WE'VE GOT OUR NEW LEARNING
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
THANK YOU FOR APPROVING THAT
THAT CAN HELP DELIVER SOME
OF THAT TRAINING AS WELL AS IN
PERSON SO THAT THE CONVERSATION
OF EQUITY IS BROUGHT OUT MORE.
IT'S AN INCLUSIVE CULTURE WHEN
THERE'S MEETINGS THE THREE
STAFF THAT WE ARE DON'T HAVE TO
GO TO DIFFERENT DEPARTMENTS AND
DIVIDE UP AND GO TO THESE
MEETINGS.
THEY'LL HAVE BABY EXPERTS IN
THEIR AREA AND THAT WILL
DEMONSTRATE A COMMITMENT TO THE
DEA A.J. PLUS PRINCIPALS OF ANN
ARBOR NEXT IS REFRESHING AND
REFINING ALL AREAS AROUND
ACCESSIBILITY, EQUITABLE AND
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK.
SO AS WE ARE KIND OF SOLIDIFY
IN THE OFFICE, WE'RE REALIZING
SOME AREAS THAT HAVEN'T BEEN
ADDRESSED YET.
ONE OF THE THINGS IS MY
POWERPOINT, MY PORTION OF THE
POWERPOINT IS NOT VERY
ACCESSIBLE IF YOU'RE AN
INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS A
NEURODIVERSITY AROUND READING
RIGHT.
IF YOU HAVE DYSLEXIA THERE'S A
WHOLE LOT OF WORDS AND A WHOLE
LOT OF ACRONYMS WITH NOT
PICTURES AND THIS IS THE EXACT
OPPOSITE OF WHAT I ADVISE
PEOPLE TO DO TAKE WORDS OUT,
PUT PICTURES IN IS WHAT YOU'RE
SUPPOSED TO BE DOING.
SO WE WANT TO CREATE THOSE
LANGUAGES, THOSE RULES WHEN YOU
WRITE A MEMO IT SHOULD ALWAYS
BE THIS WAY SO EVERYONE CAN
READ IT RIGHT.
THAT'S THE BASIS OF INCLUSION
AS LOOKING AT ALL OF THOSE
THINGS.
WE ALSO WANT TO ELEVATE THE WAY
THAT DATA IS COLLECTED AND
ASKED BEST PRACTICE IS WE WANT
TO REVOLUTIONIZE THE WAY THAT
WE DO ASSESSMENTS HERE AT THE
CITY AUDITS ACCREDITATIONS AND
BEYOND FOR ANYONE THAT'S
INTERESTED IN FOR SOME OF THOSE
THAT WILL AGAIN ENHANCE OUR
DECISION MAKING THROUGH DATA.
SO I TALKED ABOUT THE EQUITABLE
EVERYWHERE.
IT REALLY, REALLY IS AND I'VE
BEEN WORKING ON THIS AND NEEDS
TO BE EMBEDDED IN H.R..
H.R. IS OUR BLOOD OF THE
ORGANIZATION.
IT GOES EVERYWHERE WITHOUT H.R.
WE REALLY, YOU KNOW, STRUGGLE
WITH EVER MOVING FORWARD SO
WE'VE BEEN TRAINING DGI
OPPORTUNITIES FOR EACH OF OUR
EMPLOYEES REALLY PULLING IT IN
AND SAYING THIS IS HOW THIS
WOULD LOOK LIKE AND WE'VE BEGUN
MEASURING AND ASSESSING IF
THERE'S CHANGES THAT'S GOING TO
EXPAND THE KNOWLEDGE OF OUR
H.R. INDIVIDUALS AND OUR NEW
INCOMING H.R. DIRECTOR ONE DAY
TO LOOK AT EVERYTHING THROUGH
THE I LENS, LOOK AT IT
EQUITABLY AND INCLUSIVELY AND
THEN THE NEXT AREA OF FOCUS IS
THE MODERNIZATION I WOULD CALL
IT RECRUITMENT.
RIGHT NOW WE'RE RECRUITING AND
A LOT OF 1980S 90S WAYS YOU
KNOW, NO NO SHADE ON OUR
RECRUITING STAFF OR EACH OTHER
AT ALL.
THEY DO A GREAT JOB WITH WHAT
THEY HAVE BUT I COME IN WITH
THIS EXPERTIZE IN THIS AREA AND
I'M EXCITED TO GET IT GOING
THAT WOULD START WITH THE WAY
THAT WE ARE RIGHT.
OUR JOB DESCRIPTIONS ALL THE
WAY THROUGH RETENTION AND
RE-ENGAGEMENT.
SO IN PUBLIC SERVICE ONE
OF YOUR BIGGEST ISSUES WITH
YOUR EMPLOYEES IS THEY'VE BEEN
HERE FOR MANY YEARS DOING THE
SAME JOB JUST LIKE ON A LINE
FOR ANY OF THE AUTO COMPANIES.
YOU GET DISENGAGED BUT YOU'RE
STILL DOING YOUR JOB AND SO
RE-ENGAGEMENT IS PART OF THAT
THE RECRUITMENT AND REENGAGE
AND RETENTION ARE ALL AREAS
THAT I LOOK TO AS PART OF OUR
RECRUITMENT AND WILL DRIVE
INSTITUTIONAL AND SYSTEMIC
CHANGES WHEN WE CAN BRING IN
INDIVIDUALS, YOUNGER
INDIVIDUALS WHO LOOK AT THE
WORLD IN A COMPLETELY DIFFERENT
WAY THAN A LOT OF US DO.
WE'RE GOING TO SEE
INSTITUTIONAL AND SYSTEMIC
CHANGES REALLY HAPPEN QUICKLY.
THERE THE CONVERSATION THEY
WALK IN THE DOOR, THINGS
HAPPEN, THINGS CHANGE.
THEY ASK WHY ARE WE WALKING
DOWN THIS PATH THIS WAY?
AND IT MAKES EVERYONE STOP AND
LOOK AT IT AND SAY OH, WHAT'S
NEW INNOVATIVE WAY WE CAN DO
THIS?
THAT'S OUR HOPE WITH EACH OTHER
.
AND THEN PRESENT ISSUES FOR US
IS AN INTERNAL FOR ALL
EMPLOYEES AND EXTERNAL EQUITY
ASSESSMENT HERE IN THE CITY
BECAUSE THERE HAS NOT BEEN A
DTI OFFICE WE HAVE NOT EVER RUN
A FULL EQUITY.
WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT THE
DIVERSITY HERE IN THE CITY?
GIVE US YOUR FEEDBACK
ASSESSMENT.
WE'VE GOT NO SPECIFIC DATA THAT
WE'RE WORKING ON AND SO AS
STRATEGIC PLANS FOR OTHER
DEPARTMENTS THIS WOULD BE THAT
AS WELL.
IT WOULD ALSO REALLY HELP US
FOCUS AS A CITY AND YOU SEE THE
COUNCIL ON ALLOCATING RESOURCES
IN THE AREAS THAT PEOPLE SAY
IT'S NEEDED.
YOU KNOW, WE DO A GREAT JOB
WITH ALL THE DATA THAT WE HAVE
AND WE GO OUT AND LOOK AND SEE.
BUT WHERE ARE THE GAPS?
WE NEED TO FIND THE GAPS AND
CLOSE THE GAPS AND THE MOST
EQUITABLE WAY POSSIBLE AND THAT
WILL INCREASE SATISFACTION AS
IT RELATES TO THE CITY
GOVERNMENT.
IT WILL INCREASE TRANSPARENCY.
IT DOES SOME REALLY AMAZING
THINGS WHEN YOU ASK THE
QUESTIONS, SHOW THE RESULTS
SHOW THE PROGRESS OR THE
FAILURES BECAUSE YOU DO FAIL IN
SOME AREAS OF THIS AND JUST THE
CONTINUED MOVE FORWARD YOU WANT
TO PROMOTE SPACE TO HAVE THOSE
CONSTRUCTIVENESS COURSES AND
THAT'S ALL THAT I HAVE FOR YOU.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> AND CHIEF KENNEDY, THANKS.
HI.
GOOD EVENING, MAYOR COUNCIL.
SO A COUPLE OF HORIZON ISSUES
WITH THE FIRE SERVICE.
THE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FALLS
UNDER FIRE SO FOR A CITY OUR
SIZE WE REALLY ARE AT A DEFICIT
NOT HAVING A TURNKEY EMERGENCY
OPERATION CENTER ESPECIALLY THE
LAST YEAR THERE WERE MULTIPLE
INSTANCES WHERE THAT WOULD HAVE
BEEN BENEFICIAL FOR CITY STAFF
TO GET TOGETHER.
AND SO WE JUST WE KEEP COMING
UP WITH EITHER NATURAL OR OTHER
INCIDENTS WHERE THAT WOULD BE
ADVANTAGEOUS FOR US.
SO THAT WOULD BE THE PRIMARY
PURPOSE WOULD TO FUNCTION WOULD
BE TO FUNCTION AS EMERGENCY
OPERATION CENTER.
THE IDEA WOULD BE IT WOULD ALSO
BE SET UP
.
SO IF DEPARTMENTS NEED TO USE
IT FOR TRAINING IT COULD BE SET
UP THAT WAY WITH THE IDEA THAT
HEY, YOU COULD GET EVICTED
QUICKLY IF A SITUATION ARISES
THAT WE NEED IT FOR FOR
SOMETHING ELSE.
OF THE THREE ITEMS THAT'S ON
THE LIST TONIGHT, THE SECOND
ONE THE AMBULANCE TRANSPORT IS
REALLY THE ONE THAT'S PROBABLY
THE MOST PRESSING WE'RE SEEING
NOTHING BUT AN INCREASE FAR
BEYOND OUR OUR INITIAL
PROJECTION FOR HOW MUCH WE ARE
TRANSPORTING WITH THE FIRE
DEPARTMENT THEY TRANSPORTED
TWICE YESTERDAY.
WE ORIGINALLY THINKING THIS WAS
GOING TO BE KIND OF A ONCE IN A
WHILE.
IT WAS GOING TO BE A SAFETY
NET.
>> NOW IT'S BECOMING A REGULAR
OCCURRENCE AND IT JUST IT
SPEAKS TO THE NEED FOR THAT.
ONE OF THE BIGGER ISSUES FOR
THIS FALL IS THIS FOOTBALL
SEASON IS GOING TO BE UNLIKE
WHAT WE HAVE EXPERIENCED
BEFORE.
IT'S NOT NOON GAMES AGAINST A
SLEEPY COMMUNITY COLLEGE IN
SEPTEMBER BETWEEN TEXAS AND
USC, THE BIG TEN GAMES THAT WE
SAW AT THE END OF THE YEAR.
WELCOME TO SEPTEMBER.
THESE ARE GOING TO BE BIG PRIME
TIME NATIONAL MEDIA COVERAGE
FOR MANY OF THESE GAMES.
I HAVE THE STRONG DESIRE TO
WANT TO BE ABLE TO PUT ON
ADDITIONAL RIGS.
WE DON'T HAVE THAT CAPACITY
RIGHT NOW.
WE JUST HAVE THE ONE AMBULANCE
WE DO HAVE A KIND OF AN
EMERGENCY AGREEMENT WITH THE
AIRBORNE.
THEY STRUGGLE WITH KEEPING
THEIR FLEET ONLINE.
>> SO THAT'S A ARE OUR NEEDED
USE FOR A SECOND AMBULANCE IS
GOING TO BECOME MUCH MORE THAN
WHAT THAT AGREEMENT WITH THE
AIRBORNE IS EVER INTENDED TO
DO.
THE PROPOSAL THE MR. TO HONI
WERE KIND TWO WAYS, ONE
OF WHICH COULD BE TO GET A USED
AMBULANCE.
THEY'RE USED FOR A REASON THAT
COMES WITH A HOST OF CHALLENGES
IN TERMS OF ONGOING MAINTENANCE
COSTS, THE COST OF A NEW ONE IS
ALSO PRETTY EXPENSIVE.
SO I WAIT HIS INDISPOSITION IF
WHAT DIRECTION THEY'RE GOING TO
WANT TO PROPOSE FOR THAT.
BUT THAT SECOND AMBULANCE IS
REALLY SOMETHING THAT'S VERY
NECESSARY IN AN OPERATION WE
NEED FOR OUR DEPARTMENT AND
THEN THE OTHER ONE THAT WE'RE
REALLY LOOKING FOR THIS WILL
NOT BE A BUDGET REQUEST OUT
OF GENERAL FUND BUT TO FUND THE
NEW FIRE STATION FOUR ON THE
EAST SIDE.
THIS IS THE STATION.
IT'S CURRENTLY AT PLATTE AND
HURON PARKWAY.
IT WOULD BE TO REPLACE IT AT
ITS CURRENT LOCATION AND MR.
FOURNIER IS GOING TO TOUCH ON
THIS.
THIS IS PART OF CURRENT FEDERAL
EARMARKS.
THIS IS ALSO ON THE LIST FOR
STATE OF MICHIGAN EARMARKS.
THIS IS LITERALLY SHOVEL READY.
IT'S GONE THROUGH SITE PLAN
APPROVAL.
WE ARE READY TO BID THIS
PROJECT THE BIG ONE THAT WE
RECENTLY FOUND OUT IS WE
RECEIVE FUNDING FROM THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN, NOT THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN BUT THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN ANNUALLY FOR
COVERING PUBLIC FACILITIES.
OBVIOUSLY THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN IS THE SQUARE
FOOTAGE BEHEMOTH OF THAT AND SO
THAT FUNDING HISTORICALLY WAS
NOT VERY DEPENDENT.
THE STATE HAS FUNDED THAT
CONSISTENTLY FOR GOING ON.
I BELIEVE FIVE YEARS NOW IN
DISCUSSION WITH THE BOND
ATTORNEY I WOULD DEFER TO THE
FINANCE DEPARTMENT WITH THOSE
FUNDS ARE GOING TO BE ELIGIBLE
TO BOND.
SO THAT'S WHAT WE WOULD
ADVOCATE IF WE DON'T RECEIVE
FUNDING EITHER STATE OR FEDERAL
EARMARK FUNDING FOR THIS
STATION OR THERE IS A BALANCE
THAT WE WOULD THIS SUMMER OR
FALL EXPLORE THE BOND MARKET
FOR THAT IDEALLY WITH A BID THE
END OF CALENDAR TWENTY FOUR AND
THERE'S REALLY NO REASON WE
COULDN'T START CONSTRUCTION
NEXT YEAR.
CONSTRUCTION COSTS ARE ONLY
GOING TO GO UP.
THIS STATION IS TRULY
INFRASTRUCTURES FAILING.
WE HAD TO INSTALL A SUMP PUMP
TO KICK THE SANITARY SEWER OUT
SO WE CAN JUST CONTINUE
INVESTMENT IN THIS BUILDING IS
JUST GOOD MONEY AFTER BAD SO
THAT IS WHAT I HAVE AND MR.
FOURNIER
EVENING I WILL TRY MY
BEST TO BE BRIEF.
I WANT TO TALK ABOUT WHAT OUR
EARMARKED COSTS ARE FOR THIS
YEAR.
FEDERAL EARMARK REQUESTS ARE
BEING PUT IN RIGHT NOW WITH
CONGRESS.
I WILL START WITH OUR STATE
APPROPRIATIONS.
WE'RE ASKING FOR THREE PROJECTS
RIGHT NOW.
FIRST IS FINISHING FUNDING FOR
THE ELECTION CENTER WHICH WE
STILL HAVE A LOT OF INTEREST IN
LEADERSHIP IN THE LEGISLATURE
ON THIS PROJECT.
SO I'M OPTIMISTIC AS CHIEF
KENNEDY HAS SAID, WE ARE ALSO
ASKING FOR FUNDING FOR THE FIRE
STATION.
TWELVE MILLION DOLLARS TOTAL
ASK I'M NOT CONVINCED THAT
THERE'S TWELVE MILLION DOLLARS
OF MONEY IN THE LEGISLATURE FOR
THIS PROJECT BUT WE'RE ASKING
FOR SUPPORT AND ANY AMOUNT THAT
THEY CAN GIVE US AND LASTLY
WE'RE ASKING FOR FUNDS FOR THE
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER
SINCE OUR ARPA FUNDS HAVE BEEN
EXPENDED AT THE STATE LEVEL
THERE IS LESS MONEY TO GO
AROUND SO EARMARK OPPORTUNITIES
CERTAINLY EXIST IN LANSING.
THEY'RE NOT AS BOUNTIFUL AS
THEY WERE IN THE LAST FISCAL
YEAR.
SO WE'RE TRYING TO KEEP THAT IN
MIND AND BE A LITTLE MORE
STRATEGIC ABOUT WHAT WE'RE
ASKING FOR ON THE FEDERAL SIDE
.
I DON'T KNOW HOW TO SAY THIS
POLITELY, BUT CONGRESS IS A
BASKET CASE.
THEY HAVEN'T PASSED THEIR
BUDGET FROM LAST YEAR.
HOWEVER, OUR REPRESENTATIVES
REPRESENTATIVE DINGELL AND
SENATOR PETERS AND SENATOR
STABENOW HAVE ASKED FOR
SUBMISSIONS FOR EARMARKS FOR
THE COMING BUDGET FOR FISCAL
YEAR.
TWENTY FIVE.
THE GUIDANCE HASN'T CHANGED
THIS YEAR MOSTLY BECAUSE THE
GUIDANCE HASN'T ACTUALLY BEEN
SET.
SO THEY HAVE SIMPLY ASKED US TO
USE LAST YEAR'S GUIDANCE TO ASK
FOR PROJECTS.
SO WE ARE RENEWING OUR REQUESTS
FROM LAST YEAR.
THEY ALL SCORED VERY WELL BUT
BECAUSE OF THE POLITICAL
MACHINATIONS IN D.C. WE'RE
WASHED OUT AT VARIOUS PARTS
OF THE APPROPRIATIONS PROCESS.
WE'LL BE ASKING FOR ONE POINT
FIVE MILLION DOLLARS FOR A
TRAIN STATION DESIGN AND
ENGINEERING TO GET THE TRAIN
STATION PROJECT MOVING AGAIN TO
MILLION DOLLARS TO HELP WITH
THE BARTON POND EMBANKMENT
PROJECT.
THAT'S A SIX POINT EIGHT
DOLLARS MILLION PROJECT TOTAL
SO WE'RE LOOKING FOR FUNDS TO
HELP OFFSET SOME OF THOSE COSTS
AND WE'RE ALSO SUPPORTING A
REQUEST FOR THE TREE LINE TRAIL
TO HELP THEM KICK OFF ANOTHER
ROUND OF PROPERTY ACQUISITION
FOR THEIR EFFORTS AT TWO
MILLION DOLLARS.
IT SHOULD BE NOTED THAT THERE
WAS ONE OTHER ASK THAT WE ASKED
FOR LAST YEAR WHICH IS FUNDING
TO HELP SUPPORT THE OUR VISION
ZERO EFFORTS IN THE DOWNTOWN
UPDATE PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS
CONGRESSWOMAN DINGELL, IT
APPEARS HAS BEEN SUCCESSFUL AT
GETTING THAT EARMARK REQUEST
PARTIALLY FUNDED WHICH IS A BIT
OF A COUP.
THERE ARE A LOT OF DEMOCRATS
WHO ARE SHUT OUT OF EARMARK
FUNDING THIS YEAR IN CONGRESS.
>> SO WHEN YOU SEE HER, PLEASE
THANK HER FOR HER DILIGENCE
MOVING FORWARD.
YOU'VE SEEN A LOT OF THESE
PROJECTS ALREADY MENTIONED BY
STAFF BUT WE HAVE QUITE A BIT
OF CAPITAL OBLIGATIONS COMING
UP IN THE NEXT 10 20 YEARS.
REPLACEMENT THE WATER TREATMENT
PLANT IS IMPORTANT.
THERE ARE RECYCLING DROP OFF
CENTER MAJOR CAPITAL NEEDS IN
THE PARK SYSTEM THAT ARE AS YET
UNKNOWN BUT WE KNOW THEY ARE
SUBSTANTIAL.
THE TREE LINE TRAIL IS A BIG
PROJECT.
THE BARTON DAM REHABILITATION
ALL OF THE EXPENSES RELATED TO
OUR SUSTAINABILITY PLAN, THE
CARBONNEUTRAL IN OUR PLAN AND
OF COURSE THE TRAIN STATION.
MANY OF THESE PROJECTS FOUR
OF THEM BY MY EYE ARE MORE THAN
ONE HUNDRED MILLION DOLLAR
PROJECTS.
AND SO YOU KNOW, WHEN WE ASK
FOR COMMUNITY PROJECT FUNDING
FROM THE STATE OR THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT THAT'S USUALLY
FUNDING THAT COMES AT MOST IN A
COUPLE OF MILLION DOLLAR CHUNKS
AT MOST.
AND SO WE DO OUR BEST TO FUND
THE PRIORITIES THAT WE HAVE.
WE LOOK FOR PROJECTS THAT ARE
SHOVEL READY AND CAN BE RIGHT
SIZED TO THAT ASK AMOUNT.
BUT WE ALSO AREN'T SHY ABOUT
ASKING FOR SUPPORT FOR THE
LARGER PROJECTS.
BUT THESE LARGER PROJECTS ARE
NOT GOING TO BE COMPLETED BY
SOME KIND OF SAVING GRACE
OF MONEY FROM THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT AND I THINK THAT'S
IMPORTANT FOR US TO KEEP IN
MIND WE NEED TO BE ACCUMULATING
SOURCES OF FUNDING FROM A BROAD
SPECTRUM IN ORDER TO GET THESE
PROJECTS DONE.
SO WITH THAT I'M PROUD TO SAY I
MIGHT BE THE SHORTEST SPEAKER
TONIGHT FOR ONCE IN MY CAREER
WITH THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR AND
I WILL TURN THE MICROPHONE OVER
TO MAURA THOMPSON.
>> YEAH, GOOD EVENING, TAYLOR
COUNCIL MEMBERS.
NICE TO BE WITH YOU TONIGHT.
>> SO WE'RE GOING TO JUMP RIGHT
IN.
I ALWAYS LIKE TO START WITH
REMINDING EVERYBODY THAT THE
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
RUNS TWO SYSTEMS WE RUN A
PARKING SYSTEM FOR THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR AND WE RUN THE TAX
INCREMENT FINANCING SYSTEM
BETTER KNOWN AS TIF AND THROUGH
TIF IS HOW WE MAKE OUR
INVESTMENTS IN DOWNTOWN.
AND IT'S IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT
THE TIF SYSTEM DOES NOT SUPPORT
THE PARKING SYSTEM AND THE
PARKING SYSTEM DOES NOT SUPPORT
A SYSTEM.
SO TONIGHT I'M GOING TO START
WITH THE PARKING SYSTEM.
SO FOUR FLY TWENTY FIVE SOME
OF OUR MAJOR AREAS OF FOCUS IN
THE PARKING SYSTEM INCLUDE AS I
THINK YOU ARE ALL WELL AWARE WE
HAVE A PROPOSED SLATE OF RATE
INCREASES.
THE BOARD WILL BE VOTING ON
THESE RATES AT THEIR APRIL
BOARD MEETING SHOULD THEY
APPROVE A RATE INCREASE.
THE RATES WILL BE IMPLEMENTED
IN JUNE GETTING THIS RATE
INCREASE APPROVED IS REALLY
CRITICAL FOR THE D.A. TO MEET
THE TWO MAIN PRIORITIES THAT WE
HAVE IN OUR PARKING SYSTEM
WHICH IS TO MAINTAIN THESE VERY
IMPORTANT CITY ASSETS AND TO
RUN A FINANCIALLY SOUND SYSTEM
ON THE SUSTAINABILITY
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND ENERGY
EFFICIENT SIDE.
WE ARE WORKING ON IN FY TWENTY
FIVE REPLACING EIGHT HUNDRED
AND EIGHTY EIGHT METAL HALIDE
LIGHT FIXTURES IN TWO OF OUR
STRUCTURES.
SO THE FORESTER STRUCTURE AND
THE FORTH IN WASHINGTON STREET
STRUCTURE WILL HAVE COMPLETE
FIXTURE REPLACEMENT.
THEY WILL BE REPLACED WITH LEDS
THAT WILL SAVE ON OUR ENERGY
CONSUMPTION AND ON OUR COSTS.
WE WILL ALSO BE REPLACING ALL
OF THE ROOFTOP FENCING ON ALL
OF OUR FACILITIES.
IF YOU RECALL IT'S BEEN ABOUT
SEVEN YEARS.
WE STARTED A PROJECT WHERE WE
BEGAN INSTALLING FENCING
ON ALL
OF OUR FACILITIES.
WE BEGAN AT THE ROOFTOP AND
WE'VE WORKED OUR WAY DOWN.
OUR GOAL WAS TO GET EVERY LEVEL
COVERED ABOVE LEVEL TO WE
FINISHED THAT THIS FALL AND NOW
JUST AS WE INTENDED TO DO,
WE'RE REVISITING THE ROOFTOPS
SO THE NEW FENCING WILL HAVE AN
ENHANCED DESIGN AND ENHANCED
MATERIALS AND THEN AS WE DO
EVERY YEAR WE WILL BE TAKING ON
ABOUT ONE POINT SIX DOLLARS
MILLION IN ANNUAL RESTORATION.
THINGS LIKE I DON'T NEED TO
READ THESE ALL CONCRETE MASONRY
REPAIRS WEATHERPROOFING A WHOLE
HOST OF THINGS AND ALL OF THIS
IS IN SERVICE TO EXTEND THE
LIFE OF THESE CITY ASSETS.
>> SO ON THE HORIZON FOR THE
PARKING SYSTEM BEFORE I GET
INTO SOME OF THE HIGHLIGHTS FOR
THE FUTURE, I HAVE TO SAY THAT
ALL OF THIS IS PREDICATED ON
PARKING RATES BEING APPROVED
SHOULD THOSE RATE INCREASES NOT
BE APPROVED, OUR FOCUS WILL
LOOK MUCH DIFFERENT AND WE WILL
HAVE SOME VERY CHALLENGED
DECISIONS TO MAKE.
SO ASSUMING BEING OPTIMISTIC
AND ASSUMING THAT PARKING RATES
GET THAT THOSE RATES GET
APPROVED, FINANCIAL STEWARDSHIP
IS SOMETHING THAT WE'RE ALWAYS
LOOKING AT IN THE PARKING
SYSTEM.
SO THROUGH OUR RATE STUDY WE
UTILIZE SPECIALIZED SOFTWARE
FROM A COMPANY CALLED MUNY
WORTH.
THEY DEVELOPED A MODELING
SYSTEM WHERE WE ARE NOW ABLE TO
LOOK AT THE IMPACTS THAT
CHANGES IN UTILIZATION AND
CHANGES IN RATES HAVE ON THE
FINANCE PICTURE OF OUR PARKING
SYSTEM MOVING INTO THE FUTURE.
SO WE NOW HAVE THIS REALLY
POWERFUL BUDGETING TOOL THAT WE
CAN USE TO KEEP ON TOP
OF CHANGES THAT ARE OCCURRING
IN THE SYSTEM AND WHAT'S THE
IMPACT ON THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS SIDE?
>> WE WILL CONTINUE TO FOLLOW
VERY DILIGENTLY A 20 YEAR
MAINTENANCE PLAN.
WE JUST UPDATED THIS PLAN TO
INCLUDE ALL OF THOSE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS THAT WOULD DEFER
DURING THE PANDEMIC.
>> SO THIS IS A PARTICULARLY
IMPORTANT YEAR FOR OUR CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS PLAN BECAUSE WE'RE
STARTING TO PROGRAM INTO
OUTLYING YEARS ALL OF THOSE
CAPITAL NEEDS INCLUDING
EVERYTHING THAT WAS DEFERRED
AND AGAIN THE THE GOAL OF THIS
IS TO MAXIMIZE THE LIFE
OF THESE CITY ASSETS WILL ALSO
CONTINUE ON THE LIGHT FIXTURE
REPLACEMENT.
AS I MENTIONED, WE WILL HIT TWO
STRUCTURES IN NY TWENTY FIVE IN
OUTLYING YEARS.
WE WILL JUST CONTINUE THAT WORK
THROUGHOUT THE SYSTEM AND
FINALLY THE DDA IS COMMITTED TO
CONTINUING TO FUND THE GO PASS
AND GET DOWNTOWN PROGRAM TO
ENCOURAGE TRANSIT USE AND THIS
IS NOT ONLY TO HELP MOVE THE
NEEDLE ON OUR VERY AMBITIOUS
VMT GOALS OF REDUCING OUR VMT
BY 50 PERCENT.
BUT THE CAPACITY IS ALSO A
REALLY VALUABLE TOOL FOR OUR
DOWNTOWN EMPLOYERS TO OFFER FOR
THEIR EMPLOYEES.
SO NOW WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON
TO THE CHIP SIDE AND JUST AS A
REMINDER, TIFF IS THE ONLY
REVENUE SHARING TOOL WE HAVE IN
MICHIGAN TO MAKE INVESTMENTS IN
INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS IN
OUR DOWNTOWN.
>> SO THE DDA REALLY WORKS HARD
TO LEVERAGE THESE TAX DOLLARS
TO MAXIMIZE THE COMMUNITY
BENEFIT.
SO FOR F.I. TWENTY FIVE ON THE
TIF SIDE WE ARE IN A VERY
INTENTIONAL PLANNING PHASE IN
ALL OF THE INITIATIVES IN
TWENTY FIVE ARE CONNECTED AND
COORDINATED WITH CITY EFFORTS
SO WE ARE IN THE PROCESS
OF DEVELOPING A NEW DEVELOPMENT
AND TIF PLAN.
THIS WILL BE A DENHA PLAN THAT
IS IN ALIGNMENT WITH CURRENT
CITY GOALS AND A PLAN THAT IS
IN ALIGNMENT WITH STATE
STATUTES.
>> STATE STATUTE HAS CHANGED
SINCE THE LAST TIME OUR PLAN
WAS UPDATED IN 2003 AND WE ARE
WE ARE DOING THIS WORK REALLY
IN PARALLEL WITH THE CITY'S
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND WE
ANTICIPATE HAVING THIS PLAN
COMPLETED PROBABLY IN JUNE
OF TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
SO IT'S A LENGTHY PROCESS.
>> THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY THIS IS A
COLLABORATION WITH THE CITY.
THE STUDY ITSELF HAS FOUR MAIN
PILLARS THAT WE'RE LOOKING AT.
>> HOWEVER THE OVERALL GOAL
OF THE STUDY IS REALLY TO
BALANCE THE DEMANDS THAT THAT
WE'RE SEEING PLACED ON OUR
DOWNTOWN STREETS.
THE RECOMMENDED PATIENTS THAT
COME FROM THIS STUDY WILL
INFORM FUTURE CAPITAL
INVESTMENTS FOR THE DDA WHICH
IN TURN WILL INFORM OUR
DEVELOPMENT PLAN ENERGY UTILITY
STUDY.
THIS IS A COLLABORATION WITH
OUR COLLEAGUES IN THE OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND I BELIEVE
YOU ALL JUST APPROVED AT YOUR
LAST COUNCIL MEETING THE ENERGY
UTILITY STUDY CONTRACT.
SHORTLY YOU WILL BE SEEING A
COST SHARE FROM THE DENHA
COMING YOUR WAY.
WE ARE PARTICIPATING IN FUNDING
A PORTION OF THIS STUDY BECAUSE
AMONG THE MANY THINGS THE STUDY
IS GOING TO LOOK AT IT WILL BE
LOOKING AT IDENTIFYING
LOCATIONS FOR GEOTHERMAL IN OUR
DOWNTOWN.
SO AGAIN THE RECOMMENDATIONS
FROM THIS ENERGY UTILITY STUDY
WILL INFORM OUR FUTURE WORK
WHICH WILL INFORM OUR
DEVELOPMENT PLAN WILL ALSO
CONTINUE FOR TWENTY FIVE ON
WORKING WITH OUR AGAIN OUR
COLLEAGUES AT THE CITY ON
DEFINING MAINTENANCE
RESPONSIBILITIES IN OUR
DOWNTOWN.
SO WE'VE BEEN WORKING ON
DETERMINING WHO TAKES CARE
OF WHAT ELEMENTS IN OUR
DOWNTOWN AND THE GOAL REALLY IS
TO IDENTIFY GAPS IN MAINTENANCE
AND ALSO LOOK AT THINGS THAT
PERHAPS THE CITY IS CURRENTLY
MAINTAINING OR MAYBE IT MIGHT
MAKE MORE SENSE FOR THE DENHA
TO TAKE OVER SOME OF THOSE
THINGS.
AND AGAIN, THIS IS ALL IN
SERVICE OF PREPARING FOR OUR
NEW DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND
FINALLY IN TWENTY FIVE WE HAVE
A MAJOR FOCUS ON DATA
COLLECTION.
>> SO WE RECENTLY SUBSCRIBE TO
TWO DATA SERVICES PLACER II AND
REPLICA.
WE ARE ALSO INSTALLING
ADDITIONAL COUNTERS ALONG OUR
BIKEWAY STREETS AND WHAT WE'RE
LOOKING TO DO WITH THIS DATA IS
TO REALLY UNDERSTAND AND
PANDEMIC RECOVERY TRENDS
DOWNTOWN IN THE OUTCOMES OF OUR
PROJECTS AND WE'VE JUST KIND
OF DIPPED OUR TOE INTO THE
WATER ON LOOKING INTO THIS
DATA.
THERE'S JUST SO MUCH AND I'M
ACTUALLY GOING TO BRING I'LL BE
HERE MONDAY NIGHT DOING A DENHA
UPDATE AND I'M GOING TO BRING
YOU ALL A SAMPLE OF WHAT WE'RE
SEEING.
I THINK YOU'LL FIND IT REALLY
INTERESTING.
AND SO ON THE TIF SIDE ON THE
HORIZON, THE PANDEMIC TAUGHT US
MANY LESSONS.
ONE OF THE LESSONS THAT WE
LEARNED WAS THE IMPORTANCE
OF HAVING A RESILIENT DOWNTOWN
AND AND BE RESILIENT I MEAN
RESILIENT TO CRISIS WHETHER IT
BE HEALTH RELATED, WHETHER IT
BE CLIMATE RELATED, WHETHER IT
BE ECONOMIC.
SO WE ARE FOCUSING OUR EFFORTS
INTO THE FUTURE ON DOING WHAT
WE CAN TO ENSURE THAT WE HAVE A
RESILIENT DOWNTOWN AND BY
FOCUSING ON THE AREAS I'M GOING
TO TALK ABOUT SO PLACEMAKING
AND VIBRANCY I THINK WE ALL
KNOW THAT REALLY WHAT WE NEED
TO MAKE A DOWNTOWN VIBRANT IS
PEOPLE AND IN ORDER TO ATTRACT
PEOPLE WE MUST INVEST IN
QUALITY OF LIFE INFRASTRUCTURE.
I RECENTLY READ AN ARTICLE
ABOUT THE PATH TO PROSPERITY IN
MICHIGAN AND ONE OF THE THINGS
THEY TALKED ABOUT WAS WE NEED
TO REALLY SHIFT THE WAY WE'RE
LOOKING AT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
FROM KIND OF THE TRADITIONAL WE
NEED TO ATTRACT BUSINESSES TO
WE NEED TO GET A CONCENTRATION
OF TALENT.
SO BASICALLY WHAT WE WANT TO DO
IS WHAT WILL BRING YOUNG
TALENTED PEOPLE HERE.
WHAT ARE THEY LOOKING FOR IN A
COMMUNITY?
AND I THINK WHAT THEY'RE
LOOKING FOR AND I THINK THE
DATA SHOWS WHAT THEY'RE LOOKING
FOR IS WALKABILITY.
THEY'RE LOOKING FOR PLACES THAT
ARE SAFE TO BIKE.
THEY'RE LOOKING FOR TRANSIT
RICH COMMUNITIES.
THEY'RE LOOKING FOR COMMUNITIES
THAT HAVE A CERTAIN EXPERIENCE
.
SO INVESTING IN PLACEMAKING IS
VERY IMPORTANT TO ZERO.
>> WE KNOW THAT WE HAVE VERY
AMBITIOUS CLIMATE NEUTRALITY
GOALS AND WE ALSO KNOW THAT OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS CAN
HELP MOVE THE NEEDLE AND ON
SOME OF THESE GOALS AGAIN THE
RECOMMENDATION FROM THE STUDIES
WE TALKED ABOUT ON THE PREVIOUS
SLIDE ARE REALLY GOING TO
INFORM THE WORK WE DO.
AND I ALSO THINK AND I KNOW YOU
ALL HAVEN'T TALKED ABOUT YET
BUT THE JURISDICTIONAL TRANSFER
STUDY JUST KEEP IN MIND THAT 17
PERCENT OF THOSE TRUNK LINES
ARE WITHIN THE DENHA SO JUST
ANOTHER POSSIBILITY VISION ZERO
STREET REDESIGN, TWO WAY
RESTORATIONS, SEPARATED
BIKEWAYS.
WE KNOW THAT ALL OF THESE
THINGS CONTRIBUTE TO SAFER AND
MORE COMFORTABLE STREETS AND WE
ARE COMMITTED TO CONTINUE OUR
WORK TO TRY TO ADVANCE VISION
ZERO ON THE AFFORDABLE CITY
SIDE WE'LL BE CONTINUING TO
WORK WITH OUR PARTNERS AT THE
HOUSING COMMISSION.
WE ARE ALWAYS LOOKING FOR WAYS
OR OPPORTUNITIES WHERE WE CAN
COORDINATE OUR INFRASTRUCTURE
WORK SO THAT WE ARE SUPPORTING
THE WORK OF THE HOUSING
COMMISSION IS DOING ONE TWENTY
ONE CATHERINE AND THREE FIFTY
FIFTH ARE GREAT EXAMPLES
OF THIS AND WE WILL CONTINUE TO
WORK WITH THEM ON THOSE EFFORTS
AND THEN OF COURSE WE'RE
COMMITTED TO OUR HOUSING GRANTS
AND TYPICALLY THOSE HOUSING
GRANTS ALTHOUGH THEY'VE BEEN
USED FOR MANY THINGS TYPICALLY
THEY'RE SAFEGUARDING EXISTING
UNITS IN OUR DOWNTOWN WHICH IS
REALLY CRITICAL AND FINALLY ON
THE HORIZON FOR THE DAY WHEN
WE'RE THINKING ABOUT
CHALLENGES.
OUR BIGGEST CHALLENGE WILL BE
REVENUE CONSTRAINTS IN TWENTY
SEVENTEEN THE DAYS TIF CAPTURE
WAS CAPPED OUR GROWTH IS
LIMITED TO THREE POINT FIVE
PERCENT A YEAR AND JUST TO GIVE
YOU A LITTLE PERSPECTIVE
OF THAT IN NY TWENTY FIVE THE
TIFE CAPTURE ABOVE THE CAP WILL
BE TWENTY SEVEN PERCENT OF THAT
TOTAL CAPTURE BY TWENTY THIRTY
TWO IT WILL BE FORTY NINE
PERCENT OF THE CAPTURE AND IT
CONTINUES TO ESCALATE.
SO WE KNOW THAT WE WILL NOT
HAVE A SHORTAGE OF PROJECTS BUT
WE WILL BE CHALLENGED TO REALLY
PRIORITIZE WHICH
PROJECTS WE
MOVE FORWARD WITH AND THAT IS
ALL I HAVE AND I THINK THIS ALL
IT BEST.
GOOD EVENING MAYOR CITY COUNCIL
.
I'M JUST GOING TO HIGHLIGHT
SOME OF THE BIG PICTURE ISSUES
THAT WE'RE WORKING ON.
NUMBER ONE, AFFORDABLE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT.
THE HOUSING COMMISSION'S BUDGET
IS ABOUT FIFTY MILLION DOLLARS
A YEAR BUT ONLY A SMALL PERCENT
OF THAT IS PART OF THE GENERAL
FUND.
WE RECEIVE ONE HUNDRED AND
SIXTY THOUSAND DOLLARS ANNUALLY
FROM GENERAL FUND AND WE
RECEIVE ABOUT EIGHT MILLION
DOLLARS FROM THE COUNTY MENTAL
HEALTH MILLAGE PLUS THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING MILLAGE.
SO MOST OF OUR FUNDING IS
ACTUALLY NOT PART OF THE CITY'S
BUDGET.
BUT JUST A REMINDER ALL OF OUR
FEES ARE IN THE CITY'S BUDGET
PAID FOR WITH GENERAL FUND AND
THEN REIMBURSED WITH OUR
FUNDING SOURCES.
SO ON THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT SITE WE WILL BE
BREAKING GROUND AT KATHERINE IN
APRIL.
YOU WILL BE INVITED TO OUR
GROUNDBREAKING CEREMONY.
ONCE WE PICK A DATE YOU WILL
ALL BE INVITED.
WE WE ARE HOPING TO OWN THE
PROPERTY AT THE END OF MARCH OR
THE FIRST WEEK OF APRIL AND
THEN WE'RE RIGHT AWAY GOING TO
START WITH OUR GROUNDBREAKING
THREE FIFTY S FIFTH.
WE ACTUALLY HAD INTERVIEWS WITH
OUR TWO TOP CANDIDATES TODAY
FOR CO DEVELOPERS SO WE WILL
HAVE SOMEONE SELECTED IN THE
NEXT COUPLE OF WEEKS SO WE'LL
BE MOVING FORWARD ON THAT
PROJECT ON MARCH 18TH ONE
TWENTY THREE WEST SUMMIT IS ON
THE AGENDA FOR SALE.
IT'S A SMALL PORTION OF 721
NORTH MAIN AND ACTUALLY ST. IHF
AND FAMILY SHELTER HAS MOVED
THEIR OFFICES IN.
THEY'VE BEEN THERE FOR A COUPLE
OF WEEKS.
HOPEFULLY YOU'VE ALSO BEEN
INVITED TO THEIR OPEN HOUSE
WHERE THEY'VE BEEN ABLE TO MOVE
THEIR ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES
OUT OF THEIR SHELTER AND HAVE
EXPANDED THEIR FAMILY CAPACITY
UP THEIR SHELTER ON JACKSON
ROAD.
THE OTHER ISSUES THAT WE'RE
WORKING ON IS HOW TO FINANCE
ALL OF THESE PROJECTS AND
OF COURSE THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING MILLAGE IS A HUGE HELP
WITH GAP FINANCING.
AND ALSO ON MARCH 18TH THERE'S
A AGENDA ITEM FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION TO DO BOND
FINANCING WITH OUR KATHERINE
PROJECT WHICH WILL ENABLE US TO
BUILD MORE HOUSING SOONER IN
THE NEXT FEW YEARS AND LEVERAGE
THE MILLAGE TO PAY BACK THE
BOND OVER THE LIFE OF THE
MILLAGE OVER THE NEXT 18 YEARS
.
>> THE OTHER BIG ISSUE THAT WE
ARE WORKING ON IS THE SERVICES
PROVIDED TO OUR RESIDENTS A
LARGE MAJORITY OF THE FUNDING
THAT IS USED TO PAY OUR
NONPROFITS TO DO ON SITE
SERVICES AS WELL AS WITH OUR
VOUCHER TENANTS IS THROUGH THE
COUNTY'S MENTAL HEALTH MILLAGE
THAT PASSES THROUGH OUR
DEPARTMENT AND THEN ON TO OUR
NON-PROFITS AND AFTER WE'RE
DONE I'M GOING TO JUST HAND OUT
A SHEET.
I CAN EMAIL IT TO YOU AS WELL
ALL THE DIFFERENT NONPROFITS
THEN WHERE THE WHY AND WHERE
THEY'RE FUNDED AT.
>> SO YOU HAVE AN IDEA SOME
OF OUR HORIZON ISSUES.
A BIG ONE IS THE COUNTY MENTAL
HEALTH VILLAGE LAST WEDNESDAY
THE COUNTY STARTED DISCUSSIONS
THE COUNTY BOARD STARTED
DISCUSSIONS ABOUT RE ISSUING
THAT ON THE NOVEMBER TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR BALLOT OR RE UPPING
IT AND REQUESTING TO BE FUNDED.
BUT THERE'S A LOT OF DISCUSSION
ABOUT POTENTIAL CHANGES AS TO
WHAT ACTUALLY WILL BE
COVERED BY THAT MILLAGE.
>> THAT IS ONE HUNDRED PERCENT
OF THE FUNDING THAT'S IN OUR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BUCKET
OF THE FORTY FORTY TWENTY SPLIT
IS PASSED THROUGH TO OUR
NON-PROFITS FOR SERVICES.
SO IF WE DO NOT RENEW THAT YOU
HAVE A VERY BIG IMPACT ON THE
PROPERTIES THAT WE HAVE AND THE
TENANTS THAT WE WORK WITH.
THE SECOND ONE IS THE MARIJUANA
REBATE FUNDS.
IT'S NOT REALLY PART OF THE
GENERAL FUNDS BUT IT DOES
IMPACT THE WORK THAT WE DO IN
OUR PARTNERS IN THE COMMUNITY
LAST WEEK THERE WAS A SUMMARY
OF THE DIFFERENT PROJECTS THAT
WERE COUNCIL INITIATIVES AND
HOW YOU WANTED TO SPEND THE
COUNCIL THE SORRY MARIJUANA
REBATE FUNDS AND SO I JUST
PROVIDED A SIX MONTH UPDATE ON
WHAT THOSE FUNDS WERE SPENT ON
AND HOW THEY WERE UTILIZED.
LARGEST PROGRAM WAS A NEW
INITIATIVE THAT THE COMMUNITY
THAT IS WORKING ON IT CALLED
RISING HOPE AND THAT IS FOR
TRAUMA INFORMED CASE MANAGEMENT
SERVICES FOR FAMILIES THAT HAVE
VOUCHERS THAT ARE IN THE
JUSTICE SYSTEM SOMEHOW CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM.
THERE WAS FUNDING FOR A VARIETY
OF YOUTH PROGRAMS, PROBABLY
MANY OF WHICH YOU HAVE HEARD
OF AS WELL AS EVICTION
PREVENTION FUNDING AND THEN
SOME FUNDING FOR OUR KATHERINE
STREET PROJECT FOR THE NON
RESIDENTIAL PART OF OUR PROJECT
.
>> THE OTHER HORIZON ISSUE IS
REALLY DOING THIS EXTRA
DEVELOPMENT AND WE'VE SECURED A
LOT OF NEW GRANTS OUTSIDE
OF THE CITY HAS CAUSED A STRAIN
ON MY STAFF BOTH IN HAVING
ENOUGH STAFF TO DO THE WORK AS
WELL AS HAVING SPACE FOR PEOPLE
TO ACTUALLY DO THE WORK BOTH ON
OUR OFFICES AND OUR MAINTENANCE
FACILITY.
WE DO HAVE QUITE A FEW FTE THAT
ARE IN THE BUDGET, ALL OF WHICH
WOULD BE PAID FOR WITH FUNDING
THAT WE SECURE OUTSIDE OF THE
GENERAL FUND AND SO WE DON'T
FILL THOSE POSITIONS UNTIL
THERE'S THE IMMEDIATE NEED FOR
THEM AND WE HAVE THE FUNDING
FOR THEM.
SO WHEN A PROPERTY COMES ONLINE
AND WE HAVE REVENUE COMING IN
TO PAY FOR PROPERTY MANAGEMENT
MAINTENANCE AND FINANCIAL
SERVICES IS THE PRIMARY ITEMS
WE ARE CONTINUING TO LOOK FOR A
PERMANENT PLACE FOR US TO
EXPAND OUR SERVICES AND
CONSOLIDATE OUR OFFICES.
WE HAVE MOST OF OUR OFFICES ARE
BETWEEN MILLER MANOR AS WELL AS
S INDUSTRIAL AND WE ARE DON'T
HAVE ROOM BETWEEN THOSE SPACES
FOR ALL OF OUR STAFF AND SO
THOSE ARE OUR MAIN ITEMS THAT
WE'RE THINKING ABOUT IN THE
FUTURE.
THANK YOU
.
SO YOU HAD A LOT OF INFORMATION
THROWN AT YOU.
I CAN TELL BY THE LOOKS OF YOUR
FACES IT'S BEEN A LOT
EVERYBODY'S HERE FOR QUESTIONS
.
>> I KNOW THE RULES.
WE HAVE A HARD STOP SEVEN
MINUTES YOU I DON'T KNOW HOW
YOU WANT TO HANDLE IT.
I DON'T KNOW IF ANYBODY'S HERE
FOR PUBLIC COMMENT BUT WE'RE
READY TO ANSWER QUESTIONS.
IF YOU ASK YOUR QUESTION, THE
APPROPRIATE PERSON WILL STEP UP
HERE AND ANSWER IT AND THEN
I'LL COME BACK AND CLOSE IT OUT
WHENEVER WE'RE DONE.
>> ARE THERE QUESTIONS COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH PERHAPS IF I MAY
INTERRUPT BRIEFLY PERHAPS TO
RELIEVE THE SUSPENSE I GUESS
WHAT I'D SUGGEST TO DO IS RUN
THROUGH QUESTIONS AND IN THE
WEE IF INDEED SOMEONE SHOWS UP
FOR PUBLIC COMMENT WE'LL EITHER
HEAR THEM OR PUSH THEM AT THE
END BUT YOU ALL ARE HERE SO
THERE'S PUBLIC COMMENT.
GREAT.
WELL WE'LL WE'LL HAVE ONE OR
TWO PUBLIC COMMENTS AT EIGHT
EIGHT FORTY FIVE AND THEN ROLL
BACK WITH QUESTIONS SINCE YOU
ALL ARE HERE AND WE ALL HERE
COUNTERMELODIES MY APOLOGIES.
>> NO NEED THANK YOU STAFF THAT
WAS PRETTY AMAZING.
>> I HAVE ACTUALLY TWO
QUESTIONS FOR MISS THOMPSON.
UM YOU MENTIONED THAT SEVENTEEN
PERCENT OF THE TRUNK LINES ARE
WITHIN THE DDA AND I WANTED TO
ASK, UH HOW DO YOU IMAGINE
PARTNERING WITH US TO DEVELOP
THE FINANCIAL CAPACITY TO TAKE
THIS OVER OR WHAT WERE YOU
THINKING ABOUT IN FLAGGING THAT
FOR US?
AND THEN I'M SORRY BUT I JUST
NEED YOU TO GO THROUGH WHAT THE
LAST THING YOU SAID A LITTLE
MORE SLOWLY.
SO BY TWENTY THIRTY TWO THE
CAPTURE ABOVE THE DEEDS CAP
WILL BE FORTY PERCENT OF ACTIVE
CAPTURE.
>> I'M JUST CONFUSED BY HOW
THAT CAN BE.
YEAH SURE.
SO BY TWENTY THIRTY TWO NOW I'M
GOING TO GIVE YOU ROUGH NUMBERS
BECAUSE I DON'T KNOW THEM OFF
THE TOP OF MY HEAD BUT THE
TOTAL TIFE CAPTURE WILL BE I'M
GOING TO SAY BETWEEN 20 AND
TWENTY TWO MILLION AND THE
SPLIT WILL BE THE DDA WOULD
RECEIVE FIFTY ONE PERCENT
OF THAT WHICH WILL BE ABOUT I
DON'T KNOW TEN OR ELEVEN
MILLION AND THE AMOUNT ABOVE
THE CAP WOULD BE FORTY NINE
PERCENT OF THAT.
SO I'M KIND OF MAKING UP THESE
THE DOLLAR FIGURES BUT THE
AMOUNT ABOVE THE DEEDS CAPTURE
WILL BE FORTY NINE PERCENT
OF THE TOTAL CAPTURE AND IN
TERMS OF THE M JURISDICTIONAL
TRANSFER STUDY YOU KNOW
DEPENDING ON THE DIRECTION
COUNCIL GOES BECAUSE THOSE
THERE ARE PARTS OF THOSE TRUNK
LINES THAT ARE WITHIN OUR
DISTRICT BY STATUTE WE WOULD BE
WE COULD EITHER PARTICIPATE IN
FUNDING, PARTICIPATE IN
PROJECTS SO WE COULD BE A
PARTNER ON THOSE.
IT JUST DEPENDS ON WHAT COUNCIL
DECIDES AND WHAT DIRECTION THAT
GOES IN.
BUT WE CERTAINLY ARE ELIGIBLE
ELIGIBLE TO BE A POTENTIAL
PARTNER.
>> FURTHER QUESTIONS COUNCILOR
HARRISON, THANK YOU AND THANK
YOU ALL FOR YOUR PRESENTATIONS
THIS EVENING WITH QUESTIONS FOR
MISS HALL QUESTIONS
.
THANK YOU.
UM, I KNOW YOU DID PROVIDE A
SUMMARY FOR US WHICH ON THE
PROGRAMS THAT WERE UTILIZED BY
THE WITH THE MARIJUANA EXCISE
TAX REVENUE.
SO THANK YOU FOR THAT
.
I WANTED TO ASK YOU IF YOU
COULD ELABORATE A LITTLE BIT
MORE ON THE IMPACT OF EACH
OF THESE PROGRAMS.
>> UM, IF YOU COULD I THINK
THEY'RE THEY'RE EACH QUITE
DIFFERENT FROM EACH OTHER IN
THAT THE RISING PROGRAM.
WHAT WE DID WAS WE GATHERED THE
VARIOUS NONPROFITS THE SHERIFF
AND OTHERS WHO WORK IN THIS
AREA AND SAID HOW WOULD YOU
CREATE A PROGRAM WHERE YOU
WOULD COLLABORATE WITH EACH
OTHER?
SO THERE'S DIFFERENT AGENCIES
TO DO STUFF ON THEIR OWN LIKE
CATHOLIC SOCIAL SERVICES S.O.S
AND WE BROUGHT THEM TOGETHER
AND THEY CREATED THE PROGRAM
TOGETHER ALSO WITH THE
WASHINGTON HOUSING ALLIANCE AND
SO THEY CREATED A SYSTEM TO
COORDINATE AND DETERMINE WHO
WAS BEST AT CERTAIN PARTS
OF RUNNING THE PROGRAM.
AND SO I THINK OF ALL THE
PROGRAMS IT IS ONE THAT HAS A
STRUCTURE TO IT WHEREAS FOR
EXAMPLE THE YOUTH PROGRAMS WERE
ALL EXISTING NONPROFITS THAT
HAD EXISTING PROGRAMS THAT WE
WERE ABLE TO SUPPLEMENT AND ADD
TO AND ENABLE THEM TO EXPAND
WHAT THEY WERE DOING, SOME
OF WHICH HAD OVERLAP IN
COLLABORATION IN SOME OF WHICH
ARE SORT OF STANDALONE AND THE
WAY THOSE ENDED UP BEING FUNDED
WAS AGAIN I REACHED OUT TO THE
ENTITIES THAT WE WORK WITH THE
MOST THAT WE KNOW SERVE THE
MOST LOW INCOME YOUTH IN THE
COMMUNITY WHICH IS CAN PEACE
AND AVALON AND THEN IN TALKING
TO THEM THEY RECOMMENDED OTHER
ORGANIZATIONS THAT ARE ALSO
YOUTH PROGRAMING AND THEY ALL
SORT OF SUPPORTED EACH OTHER IN
HOW THOSE WERE FUNDED.
>> THE EVICTION PREVENTION WAS
INTENDED ORIGINALLY TO BE A
COLLABORATION WITH THE COUNTY
AND PUTTING FUNDS INTO AN
EVICTION PREVENTION PROGRAM
THAT COUNTY FUNDS.
I'M NOT EVEN SURE YET IF THOSE
HAVE I THINK THEY'RE JUST NOW
BECOMING AVAILABLE.
SO THOSE GOT SPENT BY THE CITY
OUR OUR PORTION OF THE FUNDS
WITHOUT HAVING THE COUNTY AS
PART OF THAT PARTNERSHIP OURS
WENT SO FAST AND THAT'S EXACTLY
WHAT IT SOUNDS LIKE IS EVICTION
PREVENTION WHERE THERE IS
SOMEBODY WHO IS GOING TO LOSE
THEIR HOUSING THEY'RE ABOUT TO
BE EVICTED THROUGH THE COURT
PROCESS AND WHAT THEY NEED IS
ACTUAL FUNDS TO PAY BACK OWED
RENT OR COURT FEES OF THAT KIND
THING AND THEN THE THIRD ONE OR
THE FOURTH ONE SORRY CATHERINE
STREET ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
WAS FOR ALL THE WORK THE
ARCHITECT ENGINEER THE DESIGN
AND THE COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
RELATED TO THE NON RESIDENTIAL
PART OF OUR DEVELOPMENT BECAUSE
WE CAN'T SPEND OUR RESIDENTIAL
FUNDS ON OUR NONRESIDENTIAL
PORTION AND THEN ONE TIME THREE
HUNDRED TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS WAS FOR THE PHYSICAL
BUILD OUT AND CONSTRUCTION
OF THE SPACE.
AND IN MY REPORT LAST MONTH I
REQUESTED RENEWAL OF THESE
PROJECTS BUT OBVIOUSLY THERE'S
UP TO YOU ON WHAT YOU
PRIORITIZE AND HOW YOU WANT TO
LOOK AT THAT.
ANY OF THEM CAN BE SCALED UP OR
DOWN DEPENDING ON WHAT FUNDING
IS AVAILABLE.
OK, THANK YOU.
I THINK I THINK I DO HAVE A
FOLLOW UP QUESTION FOR YOU FOR
THE RISING HOPE PROGRAM YOU
REFERENCED THAT THERE IS AN
AVERAGE OF FIFTEEN FAMILIES PER
MONTH THAT'S RECEIVING SERVICES
IS THAT I SPEAK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THE GROWTH I GUESS OF DO
YOU SEE THAT MORE FAMILIES OR
DO YOU SEE THAT GROWING GROWING
NEED OR I THINK THAT YEAH, I
THINK THE GROWTH HAPPENED ABOUT
IN THE THIRD OR FOURTH MONTH
BECAUSE IT TOOK A COUPLE
OF MONTHS JUST TO BRING PEOPLE
TOGETHER TO TALK ABOUT, YOU
KNOW, HOW DO WE MAKE REFERRALS
,HOW DO WE KEEP
CONFIDENTIALITY, HOW DO WE
TRACK THINGS, THINGS LIKE THAT?
WHAT WE TRACKING, WHAT ARE WE
DOING?
SO IT TOOK A COUPLE OF MONTHS
BEFORE THE PROGRAM IS UP AND
RUNNING AND THEN IT WAS ABOUT
LETTING THE COMMUNITY KNOW THAT
THIS SERVICE WAS AVAILABLE.
IT IS NOT JUST FOR FOLKS WHO
HAVE VOUCHERS THROUGH THE
HOUSING COMMISSION.
THERE'S OTHER VOUCHERS IN THE
COMMUNITY THAT ARE ADMINISTERED
THROUGH OTHER ENTITIES AND
WE'VE INCLUDED THAT THOSE OTHER
VOUCHER FAMILIES AS WELL.
AND SO NOW IT'S REALLY FOLKS
HEARING ABOUT IT GETTING INTO
ONE OF THE GROUPS THAT ARE
DOING THE ACTUAL PROGRAMING AND
SOME ARE QUICK AND EASY.
NOTHING'S EASY BUT MORE
STRAIGHTFORWARD AND SOME ARE
MUCH LONGER TERM AND MORE
COMPLICATED AND I WOULD EXPECT
PEOPLE TO HAVE REASONS TO COME
BACK AND USE DIFFERENT TYPES
OF SERVICES.
IT'S A VERY BROAD CLIENT
SPECIFIC SERVICES SO IT COULD
BE ANYTHING FROM HELP WITH THE
SECURITY DEPOSIT, HELP WITH
MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES, HELP WITH
FINANCIAL ISSUES.
IT COULD BE WITH YOUTH IN THE
PROGRAM.
IT COULD BE WITH ADULTS IN THE
SO IT'S VERY WIDE WHAT CAN BE
PROGRAM.
COVERED ?
SO IT'S VERY WIDE WHAT CAN BE
OK, GREAT.
COVERED ?
SO IT'S PRETTY IT'S PRETTY
OK, GREAT.
BROAD AND IT DO WE HAVE DO WE
SO IT'S PRETTY IT'S PRETTY
HAVE ANY DATA YET ON I MEAN
BROAD AND IT DO WE HAVE DO WE
REALLY THE QUESTION I GUESS I'M
HAVE ANY DATA YET ON I MEAN
WONDERING IS IS IT HELPING TO
REALLY THE QUESTION I GUESS I'M
KEEP PEOPLE HOUSED?
WONDERING IS IS IT HELPING TO
I MEAN THAT THAT WAS WHAT THE
KEEP PEOPLE HOUSED?
OVERALL GOAL WAS WAS TO HELP
I MEAN THAT THAT WAS WHAT THE
KEEP INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE OUT IN
OVERALL GOAL WAS WAS TO HELP
THE COMMUNITY AND NOT LIVING IN
KEEP INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE OUT IN
SUPPORT OF YOU KNOW, WITHIN
THE COMMUNITY AND NOT LIVING IN
SUPPORT SERVICE, YOU KNOW,
SUPPORT OF YOU KNOW, WITHIN
SERVICES TO KIND OF KEEP THEM
SUPPORT SERVICE, YOU KNOW,
HOUSED.
SERVICES TO KIND OF KEEP THEM
>> SO YES.
HOUSED.
AND I ACTUALLY HAVE NEW DATA
>> SO YES.
THAT I WILL FORWARD TO SAY
AND I ACTUALLY HAVE NEW DATA
COUNCIL THAT I FORGOT I WAS
THAT I WILL FORWARD TO SAY
GOING TO DO THAT.
COUNCIL THAT I FORGOT I WAS
I JUST GOT IT LAST WEEK.
GOING TO DO THAT.
OK, GREAT.
I JUST GOT IT LAST WEEK.
THANK YOU.
OK, GREAT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THANK YOU.
WE DON'T COME TO PUBLIC COMMENT
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
GENERAL TIME PUBLIC ON GENERAL
WE DON'T COME TO PUBLIC COMMENT
TIME IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
GENERAL TIME PUBLIC ON GENERAL
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK
TIME IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
TO COUNCIL IN THE COMMUNITY
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK
THAT MATTERS OF MUNICIPAL
TO COUNCIL IN THE COMMUNITY
INTEREST TO SPEAK OF PUBLIC
THAT MATTERS OF MUNICIPAL
COMMENT GENERAL TIME YOU DID
INTEREST TO SPEAK OF PUBLIC
NOT HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE
COMMENT GENERAL TIME YOU DID
BUT SPEAKERS IN ALL INSTANCES
NOT HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE
BOTH HERE IN THE CHAMBER AND
BUT SPEAKERS IN ALL INSTANCES
ONLINE LIVE THREE MINUTES IN
BOTH HERE IN THE CHAMBER AND
WHICH TO SPEAK.
ONLINE LIVE THREE MINUTES IN
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
WHICH TO SPEAK.
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK WILL
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
NOTIFY YOU OR THE TIME CLOCK
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK WILL
WILL NOTIFY YOU IN THIRTY
NOTIFY YOU OR THE TIME CLOCK
SECONDS REMAINING AND WHEN YOUR
WILL NOTIFY YOU IN THIRTY
TIME EXPIRED WHEN YOUR TIME HAS
SECONDS REMAINING AND WHEN YOUR
EXPIRED PLEASE CONCLUDE YOUR
TIME EXPIRED WHEN YOUR TIME HAS
REMARKS AND CEDE THE FLOOR IS
EXPIRED PLEASE CONCLUDE YOUR
ANYONE WHO'D LIKE TO SPEAK AT
REMARKS AND CEDE THE FLOOR IS
PUBLIC COMMENT.
ANYONE WHO'D LIKE TO SPEAK AT
>> GOOD AFTERNOON MAYOR AND
PUBLIC COMMENT.
COUNCIL.
>> GOOD AFTERNOON MAYOR AND
FIRST I WANT TO APOLOGIZE FOR
COUNCIL.
INTERRUPTING THE CONVERSATIONS
FIRST I WANT TO APOLOGIZE FOR
BUT THANK YOU FOR GIVING ME A
INTERRUPTING THE CONVERSATIONS
MOMENT TO SPEAK.
BUT THANK YOU FOR GIVING ME A
MY NAME IS HEATHER ZOLENSKY.
MOMENT TO SPEAK.
I'M HERE TONIGHT ON BEHALF
MY NAME IS HEATHER ZOLENSKY.
OF THE AUTISM SOCIETY
I'M HERE TONIGHT ON BEHALF
OF GREATER DETROIT.
OF THE AUTISM SOCIETY
I CAME TONIGHT BECAUSE I WANTED
OF GREATER DETROIT.
TO BE ABLE TO INTRODUCE OUR
I CAME TONIGHT BECAUSE I WANTED
ORGANIZATION TO THIS CITY AND
TO BE ABLE TO INTRODUCE OUR
TO THE COUNCIL THAT SERVES IT
ORGANIZATION TO THIS CITY AND
ABOUT EIGHT YEARS AGO THERE WAS
TO THE COUNCIL THAT SERVES IT
A HANDFUL OF SMALL AFFILIATES
ABOUT EIGHT YEARS AGO THERE WAS
IN MICHIGAN.
A HANDFUL OF SMALL AFFILIATES
THEY WERE RELATED TO THE AUTISM
IN MICHIGAN.
SOCIETY, THE NATIONAL
THEY WERE RELATED TO THE AUTISM
ORGANIZATION NATIONAL HAD SHUT
SOCIETY, THE NATIONAL
THOSE DOORS CLOSED DOWN THOSE
ORGANIZATION NATIONAL HAD SHUT
INDIVIDUAL OPERATIONS, DID A
THOSE DOORS CLOSED DOWN THOSE
LITTLE BIT OF A RESTRUCTURING
INDIVIDUAL OPERATIONS, DID A
AND CAME BACK WITH A MODEL THAT
LITTLE BIT OF A RESTRUCTURING
ALLOWED FOR ONE AFFILIATE FOR
AND CAME BACK WITH A MODEL THAT
EACH STATE THE AUTISM SOCIETY
ALLOWED FOR ONE AFFILIATE FOR
OF GREATER DETROIT IS THAT ONE
EACH STATE THE AUTISM SOCIETY
AFFILIATE WE'RE COMPLETELY
OF GREATER DETROIT IS THAT ONE
VOLUNTEER LED AND THAT MEANS
AFFILIATE WE'RE COMPLETELY
THAT WE HAVE TO CURRENTLY FOCUS
VOLUNTEER LED AND THAT MEANS
OUR SERVICES ON THE FIVE
THAT WE HAVE TO CURRENTLY FOCUS
CLOSEST COUNTIES SO MCCOMB,
OUR SERVICES ON THE FIVE
WAYNE, OAKLAND, ST. CLAIR AND
CLOSEST COUNTIES SO MCCOMB,
WASHTENAW COUNTIES.
WAYNE, OAKLAND, ST. CLAIR AND
HOWEVER, WITH THE SUPPORT
WASHTENAW COUNTIES.
OF OUR COMMUNITY AND MEMBERS
HOWEVER, WITH THE SUPPORT
SUCH AS YOU WILL BE ABLE TO
OF OUR COMMUNITY AND MEMBERS
SPREAD OUR SERVICES TO
SUCH AS YOU WILL BE ABLE TO
ACCOMMODATE THE NEEDS OF THE
SPREAD OUR SERVICES TO
STATE OF MICHIGAN OVER THE NEXT
ACCOMMODATE THE NEEDS OF THE
FIVE YEARS.
STATE OF MICHIGAN OVER THE NEXT
OUR MAIN PURPOSE IS TO BE ABLE
FIVE YEARS.
TO CONNECT BETWEEN SERVICES
OUR MAIN PURPOSE IS TO BE ABLE
SERVICE ORGANIZATION, STATE
TO CONNECT BETWEEN SERVICES
SERVICES AND THE INDIVIDUALS
SERVICE ORGANIZATION, STATE
THAT ARE IMPACTED BY AUTISM AS
SERVICES AND THE INDIVIDUALS
WELL AS OTHER NEURODIVERSITY IS
THAT ARE IMPACTED BY AUTISM AS
WE OFFER RESOURCES 24/7 THROUGH
WELL AS OTHER NEURODIVERSITY IS
OUR WEBSITE AS WELL AS THROUGH
WE OFFER RESOURCES 24/7 THROUGH
OUR REFERRAL SERVICE.
OUR WEBSITE AS WELL AS THROUGH
WE HOLD EVENTS SUCH AS RESOURCE
OUR REFERRAL SERVICE.
RESOURCE EXPO'S TRAINING OUR
WE HOLD EVENTS SUCH AS RESOURCE
PROFESSIONALS OR ORGANIZATIONS
RESOURCE EXPO'S TRAINING OUR
THAT WANT TO INTERACT WITH THE
PROFESSIONALS OR ORGANIZATIONS
AUTISTIC COMMUNITY.
THAT WANT TO INTERACT WITH THE
WE HAVE ADULT SOCIAL CLUB MEET
AUTISTIC COMMUNITY.
UPS, VACCINATION CLINICS FOR
WE HAVE ADULT SOCIAL CLUB MEET
THOSE THAT ARE OVERWHELMED WITH
UPS, VACCINATION CLINICS FOR
TRADITIONAL MEDICAL SETTINGS
THOSE THAT ARE OVERWHELMED WITH
PIERCER WORKGROUPS AND MORE.
TRADITIONAL MEDICAL SETTINGS
AS WE HELP THE COMMUNITY WE'RE
PIERCER WORKGROUPS AND MORE.
ABLE TO FIND AND CONNECT WITH
AS WE HELP THE COMMUNITY WE'RE
RESOURCES THAT ARE AVAILABLE TO
ABLE TO FIND AND CONNECT WITH
THEM SOMETIMES ARE ALSO ABLE TO
RESOURCES THAT ARE AVAILABLE TO
IDENTIFY GAPS SERVICES THAT
THEM SOMETIMES ARE ALSO ABLE TO
JUST AREN'T AVAILABLE IN THE
IDENTIFY GAPS SERVICES THAT
STATE OF MICHIGAN AND THOSE
JUST AREN'T AVAILABLE IN THE
INSTANCES WE WOULD WRITE A
STATE OF MICHIGAN AND THOSE
GRANT AND THEN WE WOULD PARTNER
INSTANCES WE WOULD WRITE A
WITH COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS
GRANT AND THEN WE WOULD PARTNER
THAT EXIST TO CREATE THINGS
WITH COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS
THAT FILL THE GAP FOR THOSE
THAT EXIST TO CREATE THINGS
INDIVIDUALS.
THAT FILL THE GAP FOR THOSE
IF YOU DON'T IF YOU HAVE AN
INDIVIDUALS.
OPPORTUNITY THAT WE CAN PARTNER
IF YOU DON'T IF YOU HAVE AN
WITH, YOU GUYS ARE PARTNERED
OPPORTUNITY THAT WE CAN PARTNER
WITH THE CITY TO BE ABLE TO
WITH, YOU GUYS ARE PARTNERED
COME ON BOARD ON SOME OF THOSE
WITH THE CITY TO BE ABLE TO
EVENTS.
COME ON BOARD ON SOME OF THOSE
WE WOULD LOVE THAT OPPORTUNITY
EVENTS.
TO BE ABLE TO MAKE OUR OUR NAME
WE WOULD LOVE THAT OPPORTUNITY
AND OUR MISSION A LITTLE BIT
TO BE ABLE TO MAKE OUR OUR NAME
MORE WELL KNOWN.
AND OUR MISSION A LITTLE BIT
OBVIOUSLY YOU CAN CONTACT ME
MORE WELL KNOWN.
DIRECTLY.
OBVIOUSLY YOU CAN CONTACT ME
I'LL LEAVE SOME INFORMATION AT
DIRECTLY.
THE END OF THE TABLE OR VISIT
I'LL LEAVE SOME INFORMATION AT
OUR WEBSITE WHICH IS AUTISM
THE END OF THE TABLE OR VISIT
SOCIETY GREATER DETROIT DOUG,
OUR WEBSITE WHICH IS AUTISM
OVERALL I JUST LOOK FORWARD TO
SOCIETY GREATER DETROIT DOUG,
BEING IT BEING ABLE TO WORK
OVERALL I JUST LOOK FORWARD TO
WITH EACH OF YOU AND EACH
BEING IT BEING ABLE TO WORK
OF THE CITIES IN OUR STATE TO
WITH EACH OF YOU AND EACH
BE ABLE TO HELP EVERY
OF THE CITIES IN OUR STATE TO
INDIVIDUAL LIVE LIFE MORE
BE ABLE TO HELP EVERY
FULLY.
INDIVIDUAL LIVE LIFE MORE
>> THAT'S ALL.
FULLY.
THANK YOU.
>> THAT'S ALL.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN HOUSE
THANK YOU.
WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK IN
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN HOUSE
PUBLIC COMMENT?
WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK IN
>> IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WHO'D
PUBLIC COMMENT?
LIKE TO SPEAK AT PUBLIC MAYOR?
>> IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WHO'D
NO ONE HAS THEIR HAND RAISED
SO
YOU KNOW IN PUBLIC COMMENT IS
CLOSED COUNSELING BRACKMAN,
THANK YOU.
I HAVE A QUESTION FOR CHICKADEE
.
YOU HAD MENTIONED AN INCREASE
IN THE AMBULANCE TRANSPORT
NEEDS AND I WAS JUST WONDERING
WHY YOU THINK THAT IS.
I MEAN IF I COULD IF YOU MAYBE
YOU COULD REFRESH MY MEMORY ON
WHY WE GOT GOT IT IN THE FIRST
PLACE AND WHY MAYBE THE NEED IS
INCREASED WITH YOUR UNVEILINGS
STILL APPLY.
>> SURE.
THE REASONS FOR THE TRANS FOR
THE REASONS FOR THE INCREASE
ARE THE SAME REASONS WE GOT
INTO IT.
THERE'S A NATIONAL PARAMEDIC
SHORTAGE.
IT'S EVEN MORE PER MORE
PRONOUNCED FOR PRIVATE EMS.
FIRE DEPARTMENTS ARE
CONTINUING.
FIRE DEPARTMENTS ARE ACTUALLY
STRUGGLING WITH RECRUITING
WHICH A DECADE AGO WOULD HAVE
BEEN UNHEARD
OF .
WE'RE STILL VERY FORTUNATE IN
OUR CITY BEING SOMEWHAT OF A
DESTINATION DEPARTMENT BUT THE
ISSUES THAT ARE CONFRONTING VA
ARE NATIONAL ISSUES AND IT'S
REALLY JUST STAFFING.
WE SO WE'RE FINDING THAT JUST
WHAT WE'RE GETTING CALL WHEN
THEY THEY GO TO ZERO STATUS
THAT THEY DON'T HAVE UNITS
AVAILABLE.
WE'RE ALSO FINDING THAT AS OUR
STAFF ARE BECOMING MORE
COMFORTABLE WITH WITH THIS
BECAUSE THIS IS A NEW THING FOR
THEM.
WE HAVE SOME PROTOCOL ABILITY
WHERE IF IT'S A PATIENT THAT
DOES AND IF A PATIENT MEETS
CERTAIN THRESHOLD EXCUSE ME WE
CAN CANCEL VA AND TRANSPORT
OURSELVES AND WHAT THAT HELPS
SYSTEMWIDE IS THAT FREES UP AN
ADVANCED UNIT FOR A MORE
CRITICAL CARE PATIENT.
SO THIS IS REALLY HAVING A
REALLY A I MEAN THE INTENT IS
FOR THE CITY BUT IT'S TRULY
HAVING A COUNTY WIDE IMPACT
THAT WE'RE TAKING CARE OF THE
LOW ACUITY PATIENTS SO THE
HIGHER ACUITY PATIENTS, THE
PARAMEDIC RESOURCES ARE
AVAILABLE SO THEIR STAFFING HAS
CONTINUED OUR STAFFING OR THEIR
STAFFING NEEDS HAVE CONTINUED
TO STRUGGLE AND OUR STAFF HAS
BECOME MORE FAMILIAR WITH IT,
WHICH IS REALLY KIND OF ALL
POINTING TO THAT INCREASE.
>> SO FOLLOW UP QUESTION NOW
THAT WE'RE GOING TO BE CHARGING
FEES AS I DON'T THINK WE HAVE
UNTIL RECENTLY CORRECT.
WILL THAT HELP US?
YOU KNOW HOW MUCH TO WHAT
DEGREE WILL THAT HELP US FUND
THE ACTUAL SERVICE?
SO WORKING WITH FINANCE THE
FEES ARE MEANT TO BE COST COST
NEUTRAL BECAUSE RECOVERY THANK
YOU THAT YOU COST RECOVERY AS
ONCE YOU GET ABOUT 90 DAYS INTO
THAT LITERALLY AT THE LAST
MEETING THE FUNDS ARE APPROVED
.
WE'RE STILL WORKING WITH OUR
THIRD PARTY PROVIDER.
THERE'S A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT
NEEDS TO GET SET UP WITH
MEDICARE MEDICAID BILLING.
IT'S QUITE A MOUNTAIN TO GET
ALL THAT SET UP SO REALLY TO BE
DETERMINED.
I WISH I HAD A BETTER ANSWER
FOR YOU.
WE DID TRY TO PUT SOME IN
PRELIMINARY DATA TOGETHER THAT
WILL BE USED AS PART OF THE
UPCOMING BUDGET.
SO YEAH, COUNCIL MEMBER BRAKE'S
THANKS.
>> A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS FOR
MR. STEIGLITZ
.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR COMING IN
AND THANKS FOR ALL THE
PRESENTATIONS.
I WAS HOPING YOU COULD SPEAK A
LITTLE BIT MORE TO THE FTE
ADDITION THE PLAN REVIEW I
THINK YOU MENTIONED THAT THAT
WAS COMING FROM IT WAS GOING TO
MAYBE OFFSET WHAT WE'VE BEEN
SPENDING ON CONSULTING.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT WAS THE
INTENT WOULD WE'D BE USING SOME
OF THOSE FUNDS TO TO PAY FOR
THE THE FTE IF WE ALSO ARE
GOING TO NEED THOSE THE
CONSULTING THE INTENDED TO HAVE
AN OFFSET SO THE THE FTE WOULD
OFFSET THE COST OF THE
CONSULTING SUPPORT TO THE
DEGREE WHETHER WE WOULD STILL
NEED TO USE CONSULTING TO
SUPPORT TO AUGMENT OUR STAFF,
IT WOULD BE SORT OF TBD
DEPENDING UPON WHAT THE DEMAND
ON THE SERVICES ARE RIGHT NOW.
THAT'S A FULL FTE.
WE WOULD WE WOULD ANTICIPATE
THAT THAT WOULD BEGIN TO SHRINK
AS WE BROUGHT ANOTHER PERSON ON
BOARD.
>> OK, GREAT.
AND THEN I KNOW YOU WERE
PRESENTING FOR DR. STULTS FOR
THE MCU BUT JUST IN TERMS
OF THAT THESE TWO STUDY, COULD
YOU SPEAK TO THE WHERE THE
FUNDING THAT WAS ANTICIPATED TO
COME FROM THAT GENERAL WAS THAT
THIS AND I WROTE EVERYTHING OK
OK AND THEN COULD YOU SPEAK A
LITTLE BIT MORE TO THE
SEPARATION OR THE THE DAMS
BEING FUNDED PARTIALLY THROUGH
PARKS?
I DIDN'T QUITE RECOGNIZE THAT
THAT FUNDING ARRANGEMENT
EXISTED AND KIND
OF HISTORICALLY WHAT WAS THE
THINKING BEHIND THAT
HISTORICALLY IS PRESSURE MAY
MAYBE BETTER SUITED TO ANSWER
THAT QUESTION BUT I'LL START
WITH MY RECOLLECTION.
ORIGINALLY THE DAMS WERE ALL
FUNDED OUT OF THE WATER SYSTEM
.
YOU KNOW, GOING BACK OK, SO WE
ALSO HAD A HYDRO FUND AT SOME
POINT SOME TIME AGO THE REVENUE
FOR THE TWO HYDRO FACILITIES
WHICH ARE BARTON SUPERIOR, WE
DECIDED TO BRING THOSE INTO THE
INTO THE GENERAL FUND.
BARTON WAS ALWAYS SPLIT 50/50
BETWEEN THE WATER FUND AND THE
GENERAL FUND BECAUSE AGAIN IT
PROVIDES THE EMPOWERMENT FOR
THE WATER SUPPLY THE TWO OTHER
DAMS ARE GOING GET BECAUSE
BASICALLY THEY SERVE AS
RECREATIONAL PURPOSES WERE
ADDED TO THE PARKS FUND AND
THAT'S THE HISTORY AND THAT'S
WHERE IT CURRENTLY SITS.
>> OK, THAT'S WHAT I ASSUMED.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE I WAS
MAKING THE CORRECT ASSUMPTIONS
ON THAT.
OK, OK YEAH THAT'S OVER.
THANK YOU.
AND THEN I JUST WANTED TO MAKE
ONE I GUESS GENERAL COMMENT
PERTAINING TO MR. DELACOURT YOU
HAD MENTIONED SORRY LOOKING
SCROLLING THROUGH MY NOTES I
REMEMBER WHAT IT IS YOU
MENTIONED AROUND THE PARKS OR
YEAH FOR FOR FUNDING FOR THE
PARKS THAT YOU KNOW NO SILVER
BULLETS GOING TO ADDRESS THE
FUNDING NEEDS.
YOU KNOW ONE OF THE PIECES WAS
TAKING A LOOK AT PROPERTIES AND
POTENTIALLY HOW THOSE CAN MEET
OTHER COUNCIL PRIORITIES.
I GUESS I WOULD JUST HOPE THAT
ALSO THAT'S BEEN THOUGHT
OF ALSO MAKING MEETING PARKS
PRIORITIES.
YEAH, OK.
COUNCIL MEMBER CORNELL AND MY
FIRST QUESTION IS FOR MISS
THOMPSON AND THANK YOU TO CITY
STAFF FOR BEING HERE AND FOR
YOUR PRESENTATIONS TONIGHT.
UM, WHEN YOU MENTIONED THE
PARKING SYSTEM ON THE HORIZON,
YOU SAID THAT THE WORK THAT YOU
WANTED TO DO IS IN SOME WAY
PREDICATED BY THE INCREASE IN
THE PARKING LOT, THE PARKING
RATE INCREASE GOING UP.
I'M ASKING YOU TO LOOK IN A
CRYSTAL ON REALIZE THAT'S NOT
THAT'S NOT FAIR TO SAY THAT
RIGHT NOW BUT DO YOU KNOW
OF THESE BECAUSE THERE'S FOUR
PRIORITIES HERE.
DO I HAVE ANY INCLINATION WHAT
MIGHT NEED TO FALL OFF IF THAT
PARKING RATE INCREASE DOES NOT
GO THROUGH?
>> I WOULD SAY IF THE PARKING
RATE INCREASE DOES NOT GO
THROUGH, WE WOULD TAKE A
HOLISTIC LOOK AT OUR PARKING
SYSTEM AND PROBABLY WORK WITH
OUR ENGINEERS AND WE PRIORITIZE
THINGS.
I MEAN I COULDN'T PICK OUT ONE
THING BUT WE WOULD CERTAINLY
MAINTAINING THE SAFETY OF OUR
FACILITIES I WOULD RISE RIGHT
TO THE TOP SO WE WOULD TAKE
CARE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
WE WORK OUR WAY DOWN.
THANK YOU FOR THAT AND THEN I
WANTED TO I GUESS CONFIRM
BECAUSE THE YOU KNOW WHAT THE
CAPTURABLE IS YOU CAN
ANTICIPATE THAT REVENUE I
ASSUME THAT EVERYTHING THAT IS
ON YOUR TIF SYSTEM LIST IS WE
HAVE THE FUNDING FOR THAT.
WELL, WHEN YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
THE TIF SYSTEM AND WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT WHAT'S ON THE
HORIZON, THOSE PROJECTS UNKNOWN
ARE ONLY PLANNED PROJECTS RIGHT
NOW IS THE FOURTH OUR PROJECT
TWENTY TWENTY SIX THAT IS
PROGRAMED EVERYTHING ELSE IS
GOING TO BE BASED ON THE WORK
THAT WE WERE WE ARE DOING THIS
YEAR IN PLANNING.
SO FROM A CIRCULATION STUDY
FROM THE ENERGY UTILITY STUDY
FROM OUR BASE LEVEL OF SERVICE
WORK THAT WE'RE DOING WITH THE
CITY POTENTIAL THE
JURISDICTIONAL STUDY, THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN I MEAN THERE
ARE ALL OF THESE THINGS THAT WE
COLLECTIVELY ARE DOING AS A
CITY AND WE KNOW WE CAN
ESTIMATE OUR TIF CAPTCHA IS AND
I GIVEN THE COST OF GOODS AND
SERVICES AND THE INCREASED
COSTS AND CONSTRUCTION THAT WE
ARE SEEING, WE CERTAINLY WON'T
BE ABLE TO FULFILL ALL OF THE
POTENTIAL OPPORTUNITIES THAT
COULD COME OUR WAY.
>> I THINK THE ONE THING THAT
WHEN YOU TALK ABOUT QUALITY
OF LIFE INFRASTRUCTURE AND SORT
OF THE THINGS THAT WE WANT TO
DO FROM AN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
PERSPECTIVE TO ADVANCE THE CITY
THAT FEELS PRECARIOUS TO ME AND
SO I THINK THAT'S SOMETHING TO
REALLY THINK ABOUT AS WE LOOK
AT THE BUDGET AS A HOLISTIC
FRAMEWORK, HOW DO WE PRIORITIZE
THAT PIECE OF IT IN RELATION TO
ALL THE OTHER THINGS THAT WE
WANT TO DO?
>> YEAH, AND YOU KNOW, AS A
STAFF LOOKING ON THE HORIZON IS
IS OUR MAIN CONCERN AND AS WE
DO THIS REALLY IMPORTANT WORK
WITH THIS DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND
WE WILL BE ENGAGING WITH ALL
OF YOU WE ACTUALLY JUST HIRED
OUR CONSULTANT TEAM AT OUR LAST
BOARD MEETING IN MARCH.
SO YOU'RE GOING TO START
HEARING FROM US AND I HAVE TO
JUST GIVE A PLUG BEGINNING
TOMORROW THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN, THE CIRCULATION STUDY AND
THE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT DOES START AT THE
LIBRARY THREE DAYS OF WORKSHOPS
TO WALK HOME PAGE HAS A LINK TO
ALL THE TIMES I WON'T BORE YOU
WITH DETAILS BUT WE'RE
CERTAINLY GOING TO BE TALKING
ABOUT EXACTLY WHAT YOU'RE
SAYING.
>> THANK YOU.
MY MY OTHER QUESTION IS FOR
CHIEF KENNEDY IN YOUR COMMENTS
TO I THINK COMPLIMENTARY AND
KIND OF ASK THE QUESTION I WAS
GOING TO ASK.
SO I APOLOGIZE IF THIS FEELS
DUPLICATIVE BUT WHEN YOU TALKED
ABOUT THE INCREASED DEMAND FOR
AMBULANCE SERVICES, I AM NOT
SURE IF YOU'RE SAYING THAT
THERE'S ACTUALLY MORE
EMERGENCIES HAPPENING OR IF
IT'S JUST THAT THE STAFFING FOR
VA IS NOT KEEPING UP WITH SORT
OF WHAT THE USUAL IS AND WE'RE
HAVING TO STEP IN AND FILL IN
THAT VOID.
>> IT'S BOTH OK.
YEAH, WE HAD A SIGNIFICANT
INCREASE OF CALLS FROM CALENDAR
YEAR TWENTY TWENTY THREE TO
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR.
A BIG CHUNK OF THAT WAS WITH
THE MULTIPLE STORM EVENTS BUT
SECONDARY TO THE STORM EVENT
WAS THE INCREASE OF EMS
RESPONSES AND THAT WAS OUT
OF ALL OF OUR RESPONSES THE
MOST EVEN WITH THE STORM EVENT
SEPTEMBER WAS OUR BUSIEST
CALENDAR
MONTH AND ALWAYS IS
OUR BUSIEST CALENDAR MONTH AND
THAT COINCIDES WITH 12TH AND
FRESHMAN AND A BUNCH OF HOME
GAMES THAT WE ARE REPEATING
THIS YEAR AND WHAT IS BECOMING
AGAIN THAT SEPTEMBER ALWAYS
BEING THE BUSIEST MONTH A LOT
OF THOSE HOME GAMES IN
SEPTEMBER HAD BEEN THAT NOON
KICKOFF WHICH ALWAYS WE SEE THE
LEAST DEMAND OF NEW GAMES ARE
GAMES ARE ALWAYS AN EXTREME
STRESS ON EMERGENCY SERVICES
FOR THE CITY.
THE NOON GAMES IN SEPTEMBER
WERE ALWAYS ONES THAT WE TOOK A
LITTLE BIT OF SIGH OF RELIEF
WITH THE USC AND THE TEXAS
GAME.
THERE'S NO WAY THOSE ARE GOING
TO BE NEUN GAMES FOR WHERE WERE
THE MARKETS ARE AND SO WE'RE
GOING TO SEE THE INCREASE OF OF
OF EMERGENCY SERVICES CALLS
DRAMATIC AND FOR MOST HOME
GAMES EXCUSE ME DAILY WE DO TO
BETWEEN 20 TO 30 CALLS A DAY A
TYPICAL LSU OR MSU HAD ALWAYS
KIND BEEN THE PEAK NUMBER
OF CALLS WE WOULD DO EVERY YEAR
AND THOSE WOULD BE ONE HUNDRED
PLUS AND SO WE'RE EXPECTING
THOSE HUNDRED PLUS CALL DAYS TO
BE INSTEAD OF TWO GAMES A YEAR.
WE'RE PROBABLY LOOKING AT FOUR
OR FIVE GAMES A YEAR NOW.
SO THAT'S WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO
GET AHEAD OF AND BEING ABLE TO
AT LEAST RUN ON ANOTHER RIG
WILL MAKE A DRAMATIC DIFFERENCE
FOR US TO ADDRESS THOSE PEAK
DEMANDS.
>> THANK YOU.
>> SO OUR CNN I THANK YOU
MAYOR.
>> I HAVE A QUESTION FOR OR I I
CAN YOU WILL PERSONALLY THANK
YOU FOR YOUR REPORT.
IT WAS IT WAS VERY INFORMATIVE
AND IT WAS IT WAS REALLY GREAT
TO SEE SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
YOU'RE THINKING ABOUT THE
FUTURE.
I WAS WONDERING IF YOU CAN
ELABORATE ON HOW THE NEW
ACCESSABILITY COORDINATOR TRACY
BIRD IS BEING UTILIZED AND THE
IMPACT OF HER POSITION ON THE
CITY'S ABILITY TO ADDRESS
ACCESSIBILITY CONCERNS.
>> ABSOLUTELY SO TREACY'S BEEN
ON BOARD FOR ABOUT SIX MONTHS
AND SHE'S SEEING MORE TRAFFIC
THAN I AM AROUND DIVERSITY AND
EQUITY.
SHE IS A CONDUIT FOR THE
CITIZENS AND OUR COMMISSION
KODAI AND INDIVIDUALS WITHIN
THE CITY.
THERE'S ONE OF THE THINGS SHE'S
DIVING INTO OUR TRANSITION
PLANS PARKS AND REC JUST DID
THAT REALLY BIG STUDY AND
THEY'RE DEDICATING THIRTY YEARS
TO IT.
OUR TRANSITION PLANS ARE OLD
ENOUGH THAT WE NEED TO IN MOST
OF OUR BUILDINGS START LOOKING
AT AT LEAST BRINGING US UP TO
DATE FOR THE 2010 CHANGES IN
THE LAWS WE'RE ALLOWED TO STAY
WITH WHERE WE CREATED THAT
TRANSITION PLAN BUT THERE WILL
SOON BE PEOPLE COMING AND
TALKING TO US ABOUT THAT IS
WHAT WE'RE HEARING FROM
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND THE
MICHIGAN DISABILITY GROUPS.
TRACY IS TAKING IN ALL OF THE
FEEDBACK AND UTILIZING THE
TOOLS THAT WE HAVE RIGHT NOW
FOR ANSWERING THE ISSUES.
BUT THERE ARE MANY AND WE'RE
ALSO ABSOLUTE PARTNERING WITH
AREAS LIKE DDA AND YOU KNOW, A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN BECAUSE
MAKING CERTAIN THAT WE'RE
BRINGING ACCESS THERE IS SHE'S
GOT HER EYE ON ALL OF IT.
SO I'D SAY THAT SHE'S ABLE TO
DO A LOT AND EXPLAIN A LOT TO
INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE ALREADY
DONE AN AMAZING JOB HERE, OUR
CITY EMPLOYEES.
BUT THERE'S A LOT FOR ALL OF US
TO LEARN AND TO IMPLEMENT SOME
OF THE CHANGES.
THERE'S STILL SOME STEPS THAT
HAVE TO HAPPEN THAT WE'RE
LOOKING TO STREAMLINE A LITTLE
BETTER.
THANK YOU.
I HAVE ONE QUICK FOLLOW
QUESTION.
YOU TALKED A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
EQUITY CHAMPIONS.
>> YEAH, YEAH, YEAH.
IF YOU COULD JUST ELABORATE
THAT ON A LITTLE BIT IT WOULD
BE APPRECIATE IT.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
SO RIGHT NOW TO HAVE IF A STAFF
HAS A MEETING AND ANYTHING SAY
BRIAN THEY SIT DOWN AND TALK
ABOUT WATER AND THE WATER MAINS
AND THINGS THAT NEED TO HAPPEN
.
SOMEONE AT THE TABLE NEEDS TO
HAVE A AT LEAST A PERCENTAGE
EXPERTIZE OF WHAT WE HAVE WE
BEING THE OFFICE OF EQUITY ON
THINKING ABOUT MARGINALIZED.
THAT'S WHY WE CALL IT
MARGINALIZED INDIVIDUALS
BECAUSE THEY'RE INDIVIDUALS
THAT WE HAVEN'T THOUGHT
OF PRIMARILY WHEN WE HAVE DONE
ANYTHING IN THIS WORLD AND SO
TRAINING INDIVIDUALS TO ASK THE
QUESTIONS WELL WHAT ABOUT RIGHT
.
WE WE KIND OF JOKE THAT WE'RE
THE UNCOMFORTABLE QUESTIONING
ASKING GROUP WITHIN THE CITY
AND SO TRAINING THESE
INDIVIDUALS UNDER A CURRICULUM
THAT WE'RE CREATING WITH THE
CERTIFICATIONS THAT WE HAVE AND
MY EXPERTIZE IN TEACHING THE
SUBJECT FOR YEARS, THESE
INDIVIDUALS WILL BE ABLE TO
REPRESENT AND THEN LOOKING AT
THE EQUITY REPORT THAT'S
RELATED TO RESOLUTION EIGHTEEN
TO SOMETHING THAT WE SUBMIT TO
COUNCIL QUARTERLY WE WANT TO
HAVE MORE SUBSTANTIAL DATA TO
THAT AND THOSE INDIVIDUALS WILL
BE ABLE TO SAY THEY'LL GIVE US
THAT REALLY MICRO VIEW OF WHAT
HAPPENING IN EACH AREA SO WE
CAN REPORT THAT OUT BETTER TO
ALL OF YOU.
THANK YOU.
YOU KNOW, I THOUGHT IT WAS
REFERRING TO LIKE ADMISSABLE
CHAMPIONS AFTER JUST KIND
OF TRAINING AT LEAST ONE MEMBER
OF EACH COMMISSION TO HAVE AN
ADA OR ACCESSIBLY LINE SO THEY
CAN POINT OUT THINGS IN
DIFFERENT COMMISSIONS.
WE CAN MORE YEAH.
>> BUT THAT'S ABSOLUTELY YOU
KNOW, THE A.J. PLUS YEAH.
>> YEAH.
THANK YOU.
>> ANY OTHER QUESTIONS?
WELL BEFORE TURNING IT OVER TO
MR. HONY, JUST I'D LIKE TO
THANK THANK STAFF MEMBERS ONE
AND ALL FOUR FOR COMING IN WE
AND FOR COMING IN GOOD LUCK AND
THANK YOU FOR COMING TO THE
BUILDING IN WHICH YOU WORK WELL
I'M GOING TO THANK YOU ANYWAY.
YOU KNOW IT IS YOU KNOW I THINK
WHAT WE HEAR, WHAT I EAT, WHAT
I SEE AND I THINK THE COUNCIL
SEES AND MEMBERS THE PUBLIC WHO
HAVE THE PLEASURE OF WATCHING
US SEE IS A SET
OF PROFESSIONALS WHO COME IN
EVERY DAY AND JUST WORK THEIR
BUTTS OFF TO THINK ABOUT HOW
THEY CAN IMPROVE SERVICES AND
ENHANCE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR THE
RESIDENTS OF THE CITY THAT
HARBOR THEY DO SO WITH WITH
GRACE AND VISION AND THEY DO SO
IN A IN A RESOURCE CONSTRAINED
ENVIRONMENT.
YOU KNOW, WE ALL WE'RE
OPERATING HERE IN MICHIGAN
WHERE THE POLITICAL CULTURE
OVER THE DECADES HAS
DISINVESTED IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AND GOVERNMENT ITSELF AND THAT
IS DIFFICULT FOR PROGRESSIVE
COMMUNITIES SUCH BARS SUCH AS
OURS THAT ARE DOING EVERYTHING
THEY CAN TO HELP AND PROVIDE
OUTSTANDING PLACES AND SPACES
FOR RESIDENTS AND COMMUNITY
MEMBERS.
BUT WE ARE DOING IT.
>> YOU ALL ARE DOING IT AND FOR
MY PART I COULDN'T BE MORE
GRATEFUL.
>> MR. TONY.
>> THANK YOU, MR. SO JUST A
COUPLE OF OBSERVATIONS BEFORE
THE COMMERCIAL AGAIN ABOUT
QUESTIONS.
THE ONE THING THAT CHIEF
KENNEDY DID NOT MENTION THAT
WILL BE A FACTOR IN THE RUN
VOLUME THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN IS INTRODUCING
ALCOHOL SALES, STARTING BALL
FOOTBALL, RIGHT CHIEF?
YES, SIR.
SO WHEN YOU FACTOR THE DRINKING
THAT WILL GO ON BEFORE A GAME
ALL DURING THE GAME AND AFTER
THE GAME TRAINED PROFESSIONALS
WE JUST KNOW YOUR RUN VOLUME IS
GOING TO GO UP EVEN THE PEOPLE
BELIEVE THAT
THE TIMING WAS
PERFECT.
IT'S ALL GOOD.
IT'S MY TRAIN OF THOUGHT.
I WILL NOT SAY THIS WILL BE A
TOP OR THE TOP PRIORITY.
I DON'T LIKE TO THROW
CHARACTERIZATIONS AROUND LIKE
THAT BUT THE ONE THING THAT OUR
CITY DOES NOT HAVE IT IN MY
PROFESSIONAL OPINION MUST GET
IS THE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS
CENTER IF WE DON'T GET FUNDING
FROM SOME SOURCE STATE OR
FEDERAL I JUST I NEED TO BE
TRANSPARENT.
I'VE GOT TO MAKE THAT HAPPEN
BECAUSE WE'VE BEEN LUCKY WE'VE
HAD INCIDENTS THAT HAVE COME UP
WEATHER RELATED.
WE'VE HAD I DON'T KNOW THAT WE
WOULD HAVE NEEDED TO ACTIVATE
IT WHEN THE EXPLOSION HAPPENED
BUT THERE'S A LOT
OF UNCERTAINTY THAT HAPPENS
WITHIN A COMMUNITY AND THE WAY
THAT WE DO IT NOW WE HAVE
PERFECTED THE ART OF TALKING
THROUGH TEAMS OR IN GROUP CHAT
.
THAT'S NOT THE WAY TO REALLY
HANDLE AN EMERGENCY.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE THAT CENTER.
WE NEED THE SYNERGY.
IT'S GOT TO BE HARD WIRED AND
WE NEED TO BE IN THE SAME
PHYSICAL SPACE TO PROPERLY
RESPOND.
SO IF WE'RE THROUGH WITH A
GROUP MEETING WHEN SECONDS
MATTER, YOU NEED TO BE ABLE TO
TURN TO YOUR COLLEAGUE AND SAY
WHAT ABOUT THIS OR WHAT ARE WE
GOING TO DO ABOUT THAT TODAY?
WE CAN'T
REALLY DO THAT SO IT
WILL BE ON THE TOP NEAR THE TOP
OF OUR RADAR UNTIL WE GET IT
DONE.
IF SOMEBODY ELSE CAN PAY FOR
IT, FANTASTIC.
BUT IF THEY CAN'T THEN WE'VE
GOT TO FIGURE IT OUT.
>> YOU'RE HAPPY NOW RIGHT?
QUESTIONS.
SO AGAIN, APRIL 15TH AT THE
FRONT PART OF THE COUNCIL
MEETING WILL BE WHEN YOU
ACTUALLY GET THE PROPOSED
BUDGET WE ASK YOU SUBMIT YOUR
BUDGET QUESTIONS IN WRITING
THAT THEY COME TO SARAH KIM
BUSSEL, MEYER, MARTY AND
MYSELF.
THEY WILL ALL BE COLLECTED
ANSWERS WILL BE OF DEVELOPED
FOR YOUR QUESTIONS IF WE CAN'T
GET AN ANSWER BY FRIDAY IT'S
GOING TO ROLL OVER TO THE NEXT
WEEK BECAUSE WE'LL DO THE
REPORT EVERY FRIDAY.
>> HERE'S ALL THE QUESTIONS WE
HAVE BECAUSE ALL THE ANSWERS WE
HAVE AND WE'LL DO THAT
THROUGHOUT THE BUDGET PROCESS.
>> I THINK WE ALSO I'VE GOT YOU
POSTED SOMEWHERE ON THE WEB
PAGE SO THE PUBLIC CAN SEE
WHAT'S BEEN ASKED AND WHAT'S
BEEN ANSWERED IF THERE'S NO
LAST QUESTIONS, WE WISH YOU A
GOOD EVENING.
>> SORRY WE DIDN'T HAVE SNACKS
TONIGHT BUT WE GET THE BACK
CLOCKS SO IN THE MOTION ADJOURN
MOVE BY HACKENBURG DISCUSSION
ON FAVOR OPPOSED.
>> WE'RE ADJOURNED